THE OLD MAN

AND

THE SEA




ERNEST HEMINGWAY




CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, NEW YORK

1952




COPYRIGHT, 1952, BY

ERNEST HEMINGWAY


Printed in the United States of America


_All rights reserved.  No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form without the permission of Charles Scribner's Sons_




TO CHARLIE SCRIBNER

AND

TO MAX PERKINS




THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA




He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he
had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish.  In the first
forty days a boy had been with him.  But after forty days without a
fish the boy's parents had told him that the old man was now definitely
and finally _salao_, which is the worst form of unlucky, and the boy
had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good fish
the first week.  It made the boy sad to see the old man come in each
day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry
either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that was
furled around the mast.  The sail was patched with flour sacks and,
furled, it looked like the flag of permanent defeat.

The old man was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in the back of his
neck.  The brown blotches of the benevolent skin cancer the sun brings
from its reflection on the tropic sea were on his cheeks.  The blotches
ran well down the sides of his face and his hands had the deep-creased
scars from handling heavy fish on the cords.  But none of these scars
were fresh.  They were as old as erosions in a fishless desert.

Everything about him was old except his eyes and they were the same
color as the sea and were cheerful and undefeated.

"Santiago," the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the
skiff was hauled up.  "I could go with you again.  We've made some
money."

The old man had taught the boy to fish and the boy loved him.

"No," the old man said.  "You're with a lucky boat.  Stay with them."

"But remember how you went eighty-seven days without fish and then we
caught big ones every day for three weeks."

"I remember," the old man said.  "I know you did not leave me because
you doubted."

"It was papa made me leave.  I am a boy and I must obey him."

"I know," the old man said.  "It is quite normal."

"He hasn't much faith."

"No," the old man said.  "But we have.  Haven't we?"

"Yes," the boy said.  "Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then
we'll take the stuff home."

"Why not?" the old man said.  "Between fishermen."

They sat on the Terrace and many of the fishermen made fun of the old
man and he was not angry.  Others, of the older fishermen, looked at
him and were sad.  But they did not show it and they spoke politely
about the current and the depths they had drifted their lines at and
the steady good weather and of what they had seen.  The successful
fishermen of that day were already in and had butchered their marlin
out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men
staggering at the end of each plank, to the fish house where they
waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in Havana.  Those
who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark factory on the other
side of the cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their
livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and
their flesh cut into strips for salting.

When the wind was in the east a smell came across the harbour from the
shark factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour
because the wind had backed into the north and then dropped off and it
was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.

"Santiago," the boy said.

"Yes," the old man said.  He was holding his glass and thinking of many
years ago.

"Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?"

"No.  Go and play baseball.  I can still row and Rogelio will throw the
net."

"I would like to go.  If I cannot fish with you, I would like to serve
in some way."

"You bought me a beer," the old man said.  "You are already a man."

"How old was I when you first took me in a boat?"

"Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green
and he nearly tore the boat to pieces.  Can you remember?"

"I can remember the tail slapping and banging and the thwart breaking
and the noise of the clubbing.  I can remember you throwing me into the
bow where the wet coiled lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver
and the noise of you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and the
sweet blood smell all over me."

"Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?"

"I remember everything from when we first went together."

The old man looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes.

"If you were my boy I'd take you out and gamble," he said.  "But you
are your father's and your mother's and you are in a lucky boat."

"May I get the sardines?  I know where I can get four baits too."

"I have mine left from today.  I put them in salt in the box."

"Let me get four fresh ones."

"One," the old man said.  His hope and his confidence had never gone.
But now they were freshening as when the breeze rises.

"Two," the boy said.

"Two," the old man agreed.  "You didn't steal them?"

"I would," the boy said.  "But I bought these."

"Thank you," the old man said.  He was too simple to wonder when he had
attained humility.  But he knew he had attained it and he knew it was
not disgraceful and it carried no loss of true pride.

"Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current," he said.

"Where are you going?" the boy asked.

"Far out to come in when the wind shifts.  I want to be out before it
is light."

"I'll try to get him to work far out," the boy said.  "Then if you hook
something truly big we can come to your aid."

"He does not like to work too far out."

"No," the boy said.  "But I will see something that he cannot see such
as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin."

"Are his eyes that bad?"

"He is almost blind."

"It is strange," the old man said.  "He never went turtle-ing.  That is
what kills the eyes."

"But you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes
are good."

"I am a strange old man."

"But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?"

"I think so.  And there are many tricks."

"Let us take the stuff home," the boy said.  "So I can get the cast net
and go after the sardines."

They picked up the gear from the boat.  The old man carried the mast on
his shoulder and the boy carried the wooden box with the coiled,
hard-braided brown lines, the gaff and the harpoon with its shaft.  The
box with the baits was under the stern of the skiff along with the club
that was used to subdue the big fish when they were brought alongside.
No one would steal from the old man but it was better to take the sail
and the heavy lines home as the dew was bad for them and, though he was
quite sure no local people would steal from him, the old man thought
that a gaff and a harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat.

They walked up the road together to the old man's shack and went in
through its open door.  The old man leaned the mast with its wrapped
sail against the wall and the boy put the box and the other gear beside
it.  The mast was nearly as long as the one room of the shack.  The
shack was made of the tough bud-shields of the royal palm which are
called _guano_ and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a
place on the dirt floor to cook with charcoal.  On the brown walls of
the flattened, overlapping leaves of the sturdy fibered _guano_ there
was a picture in color of the Sacred Heart of Jesus and another of the
Virgin of Cobre.  These were relics of his wife.  Once there had been a
tinted photograph of his wife on the wall but he had taken it down
because it made him too lonely to see it and it was on the shelf in the
corner under his clean shirt.

"What do you have to eat?" the boy asked.

"A pot of yellow rice with fish.  Do you want some?"

"No.  I will eat at home.  Do you want me to make the fire?"

"No.  I will make it later on.  Or I may eat the rice cold."

"May I take the cast net?"

"Of course."

There was no cast net and the boy remembered when they had sold it.
But they went through this fiction every day.  There was no pot of
yellow rice and fish and the boy knew this too.

"Eighty-five is a lucky number," the old man said.  "How would you like
to see me bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?"

"I'll get the cast net and go for sardines.  Will you sit in the sun in
the doorway?"

"Yes.  I have yesterday's paper and I will read the baseball."

The boy did not know whether yesterday's paper was a fiction too.  But
the old man brought it out from under the bed.

"Perico gave it to me at the _bodega_," he explained.

"I'll be back when I have the sardines.  I'll keep yours and mine
together on ice and we can share them in the morning.  When I come back
you can tell me about the baseball."

"The Yankees cannot lose."

"But I fear the Indians of Cleveland."

"Have faith in the Yankees my son.  Think of the great DiMaggio."

"I fear both the Tigers of Detroit and the Indians of Cleveland."

"Be careful or you will fear even the Reds of Cincinnati and the White
Sox of Chicago."

"You study it and tell me when I come back."

"Do you think we should buy a terminal of the lottery with an
eighty-five?  Tomorrow is the eighty-fifth day."

"We can do that," the boy said.  "But what about the eighty-seven of
your great record?"

"It could not happen twice.  Do you think you can find an eighty-five?"

"I can order one."

"One sheet.  That's two dollars and a half.  Who can we borrow that
from?"

"That's easy.  I can always borrow two dollars and a half."

"I think perhaps I can too.  But I try not to borrow.  First you
borrow.  Then you beg."

"Keep warm old man," the boy said.  "Remember we are in September."

"The month when the great fish come," the old man said.  "Anyone can be
a fisherman in May."

"I go now for the sardines," the boy said.

When the boy came back the old man was asleep in the chair and the sun
was down.  The boy took the old army blanket off the bed and spread it
over the back of the chair and over the old man's shoulders.  They were
strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and the neck was
still strong too and the creases did not show so much when the old man
was asleep and his head fallen forward.  His shirt had been patched so
many times that it was like the sail and the patches were faded to many
different shades by the sun.  The old man's head was very old though
and with his eyes closed there was no life in his face.  The newspaper
lay across his knees and the weight of his arm held it there in the
evening breeze.  He was barefooted.

The boy left him there and when he came back the old man was still
asleep.

"Wake up old man," the boy said and put his hand on one of the old
man's knees.

The old man opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a
long way away.  Then he smiled.

"What have you got?" he asked.

"Supper," said the boy.  "We're going to have supper."

"I'm not very hungry."

"Come on and eat.  You can't fish and not eat."

"I have," the old man said getting up and taking the newspaper and
folding it.  Then he started to fold the blanket.

"Keep the blanket around you," the boy said.  "You'll not fish without
eating while I'm alive."

"Then live a long time and take care of yourself," the old man said.
"What are we eating?"

"Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew."

The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from the
Terrace.  The two sets of knives and forks and spoons were in his
pocket with a paper napkin wrapped around each set.

"Who gave this to you?"

"Martin.  The owner."

"I must thank him."

"I thanked him already," the boy said.  "You don't need to thank him."

"I'll give him the belly meat of a big fish," the old man said.  "Has
he done this for us more than once?"

"I think so."

"I must give him something more than the belly meat then.  He is very
thoughtful for us."

"He sent two beers."

"I like the beer in cans best."

"I know.  But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back the
bottles."

"That's very kind of you," the old man said.  "Should we eat?"

"I've been asking you to," the boy told him gently.  "I have not wished
to open the container until you were ready."

"I'm ready now," the old man said.  "I only needed time to wash."

Where did you wash? the boy thought.  The village water supply was two
streets down the road.  I must have water here for him, the boy
thought, and soap and a good towel.  Why am I so thoughtless?  I must
get him another shirt and a jacket for the winter and some sort of
shoes and another blanket.

"Your stew is excellent," the old man said.

"Tell me about the baseball," the boy asked him.

"In the American League it is the Yankees as I said," the old man said
happily.

"They lost today," the boy told him.

"That means nothing.  The great DiMaggio is himself again."

"They have other men on the team."

"Naturally.  But he makes the difference.  In the other league, between
Brooklyn and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn.  But then I think of
Dick Sisler and those great drives in the old park."

"There was nothing ever like them.  He hits the longest ball I have
ever seen."

"Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?  I wanted to take
him fishing but I was too timid to ask him.  Then I asked you to ask
him and you were too timid."

"I know.  It was a great mistake.  He might have gone with us.  Then we
would have that for all of our lives."

"I would like to take the great DiMaggio fishing," the old man said.
"They say his father was a fisherman.  Maybe he was as poor as we are
and would understand."

"The great Sisler's father was never poor and he, the father, was
playing in the big leagues when he was my age."

"When I was your age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that
ran to Africa and I have seen lions on the beaches in the evening."

"I know.  You told me."

"Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?"

"Baseball I think," the boy said.  "Tell me about the great John J.
McGraw."  He said _Jota_ for J.

"He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days.  But
he was rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking.  His
mind was on horses as well as baseball.  At least he carried lists of
horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke the names of
horses on the telephone."

"He was a great manager," the boy said.  "My father thinks he was the
greatest."

"Because he came here the most times," the old man said.  "If Durocher
had continued to come here each year your father would think him the
greatest manager."

"Who is the greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?"

"I think they are equal."

"And the best fisherman is you."

"No.  I know others better."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "There are many good fishermen and some
great ones.  But there is only you."

"Thank you.  You make me happy.  I hope no fish will come along so
great that he will prove us wrong."

"There is no such fish if you are still strong as you say."

"I may not be as strong as I think," the old man said.  "But I know
many tricks and I have resolution."

"You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning.
I will take the things back to the Terrace."

"Good night then.  I will wake you in the morning."

"You're my alarm clock," the boy said.

"Age is my alarm clock," the old man said.  "Why do old men wake so
early?  Is it to have one longer day?"

"I don't know," the boy said.  "All I know is that young boys sleep
late and hard."

"I can remember it," the old man said.  "I'll waken you in time."

"I do not like for him to waken me.  It is as though I were inferior."

"I know."

"Sleep well, old man."

The boy went out.  They had eaten with no light on the table and the
old man took off his trousers and went to bed in the dark.  He rolled
his trousers up to make a pillow, putting the newspaper inside them.
He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the other old newspapers
that covered the springs of the bed.

He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a
boy and the long golden beaches and the white beaches, so white they
hurt your eyes, and the high capes and the great brown mountains.  He
lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard the
surf roar and saw the native boats come riding through it.  He smelled
the tar and oakum of the deck as he slept and he smelled the smell of
Africa that the land breeze brought at morning.

Usually when he smelled the land breeze he woke up and dressed to go
and wake the boy.  But tonight the smell of the land breeze came very
early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to
see the white peaks of the Islands rising from the sea and then he
dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of the Canary Islands.

He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of women, nor of great occurrences,
nor of great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor of his
wife.  He only dreamed of places now and of the lions on the beach.
They played like young cats in the dusk and he loved them as he loved
the boy.  He never dreamed about the boy.  He simply woke, looked out
the open door at the moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on.
He urinated outside the shack and then went up the road to wake the
boy.  He was shivering with the morning cold.  But he knew he would
shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing.

The door of the house where the boy lived was unlocked and he opened it
and walked in quietly with his bare feet.  The boy was asleep on a cot
in the first room and the old man could see him clearly with the light
that came in from the dying moon.  He took hold of one foot gently and
held it until the boy woke and turned and looked at him.  The old man
nodded and the boy took his trousers from the chair by the bed and,
sitting on the bed, pulled them on.

The old man went out the door and the boy came after him.  He was
sleepy and the old man put his arm across his shoulders and said, "I am
sorry."

"_Qué va_," the boy said.  "It is what a man must do."

They walked down the road to the old man's shack and all along the
road, in the dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying the masts of
their boats.

When they reached the old man's shack the boy took the rolls of line in
the basket and the harpoon and gaff and the old man carried the mast
with the furled sail on his shoulder.

"Do you want coffee?" the boy asked.

"We'll put the gear in the boat and then get some."

They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that
served fishermen.

"How did you sleep old man?" the boy asked.  He was waking up now
although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep.

"Very well, Manolin," the old man said.  "I feel confident today."

"So do I," the boy said.  "Now I must get your sardines and mine and
your fresh baits.  He brings our gear himself.  He never wants anyone
to carry anything."

"We're different," the old man said.  "I let you carry things when you
were five years old."

"I know it," the boy said.  "I'll be right back.  Have another coffee.
We have credit here."

He walked off, bare-footed on the coral rocks, to the ice house where
the baits were stored.

The old man drank his coffee slowly.  It was all he would have all day
and he knew that he should take it.  For a long time now eating had
bored him and he never carried a lunch.  He had a bottle of water in
the bow of the skiff and that was all he needed for the day.

The boy was back now with the sardines and the two baits wrapped in a
newspaper and they went down the trail to the skiff, feeling the
pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted the skiff and slid her into
the water.

"Good luck old man."

"Good luck," the old man said.  He fitted the rope lashings of the oars
onto the thole pins and, leaning forward against the thrust of the
blades in the water, he began to row out of the harbour in the dark.
There were other boats from the other beaches going out to sea and the
old man heard the dip and push of their oars even though he could not
see them now the moon was below the hills.

Sometimes someone would speak in a boat.  But most of the boats were
silent except for the dip of the oars.  They spread apart after they
were out of the mouth of the harbour and each one headed for the part
of the ocean where he hoped to find fish.  The old man knew he was
going far out and he left the smell of the land behind and rowed out
into the clean early morning smell of the ocean.  He saw the
phosphorescence of the Gulf weed in the water as he rowed over the part
of the ocean that the fishermen called the great well because there was
a sudden deep of seven hundred fathoms where all sorts of fish
congregated because of the swirl the current made against the steep
walls of the floor of the ocean.  Here there were concentrations of
shrimp and bait fish and sometimes schools of squid in the deepest
holes and these rose close to the surface at night where all the
wandering fish fed on them.

In the dark the old man could feel the morning coming and as he rowed
he heard the trembling sound as flying fish left the water and the
hissing that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in the
darkness.  He was very fond of flying fish as they were his principal
friends on the ocean.  He was sorry for the birds, especially the small
delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost
never finding, and he thought, "The birds have a harder life than we do
except for the robber birds and the heavy strong ones.  Why did they
make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when the ocean
can be so cruel?  She is kind and very beautiful.  But she can be so
cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and
hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for the
sea."

He always thought of the sea as _la mar_ which is what people call her
in Spanish when they love her.  Sometimes those who love her say bad
things of her but they are always said as though she were a woman.
Some of the younger fishermen, those who used buoys as floats for their
lines and had motorboats, bought when the shark livers had brought much
money, spoke of her as _el mar_ which is masculine.  They spoke of her
as a contestant or a place or even an enemy.  But the old man always
thought of her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great
favours, and if she did wild or wicked things it was because she could
not help them.  The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought.

He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well
within his speed and the surface of the ocean was flat except for the
occasional swirls of the current.  He was letting the current do a
third of the work and as it started to be light he saw he was already
further out than he had hoped to be at this hour.

I worked the deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought.  Today
I'll work out where the schools of bonita and albacore are and maybe
there will be a big one with them.

Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with
the current.  One bait was down forty fathoms.  The second was at
seventy-five and the third and fourth were down in the blue water at
one hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms.  Each bait hung
head down with the shank of the hook inside the bait fish, tied and
sewed solid and all the projecting part of the hook, the curve and the
point, was covered with fresh sardines.  Each sardine was hooked
through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on the projecting
steel.  There was no part of the hook that a great fish could feel
which was not sweet smelling and good tasting.

The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung
on the two deepest lines like plummets and, on the others, he had a big
blue runner and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they were
in good condition still and had the excellent sardines to give them
scent and attractiveness.  Each line, as thick around as a big pencil,
was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on the
bait would make the stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils
which could be made fast to the other spare coils so that, if it were
necessary, a fish could take out over three hundred fathoms of line.

Now the man watched the dip of the three sticks over the side of the
skiff and rowed gently to keep the lines straight up and down and at
their proper depths.  It was quite light and any moment now the sun
would rise.

The sun rose thinly from the sea and the old man could see the other
boats, low on the water and well in toward the shore, spread out across
the current.  Then the sun was brighter and the glare came on the water
and then, as it rose clear, the flat sea sent it back at his eyes so
that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it.  He looked
down into the water and watched the lines that went straight down into
the dark of the water.  He kept them straighter than anyone did, so
that at each level in the darkness of the stream there would be a bait
waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any fish that swam there.
Others let them drift with the current and sometimes they were at sixty
fathoms when the fishermen thought they were at a hundred.

But, he thought, I keep them with precision.  Only I have no luck any
more.  But who knows?  Maybe today.  Every day is a new day.  It is
better to be lucky.  But I would rather be exact.  Then when luck comes
you are ready.

The sun was two hours higher now and it did not hurt his eyes so much
to look into the east.  There were only three boats in sight now and
they showed very low and far inshore.

All my life the early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought.  Yet they are
still good.  In the evening I can look straight into it without getting
the blackness.  It has more force in the evening too.  But in the
morning it is painful.

Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling
in the sky ahead of him.  He made a quick drop, slanting down on his
back-swept wings, and then circled again.

"He's got something," the old man said aloud.  "He's not just looking."

He rowed slowly and steadily toward where the bird was circling.  He
did not hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down.  But he
crowded the current a little so that he was still fishing correctly
though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to use the
bird.

The bird went higher in the air and circled again, his wings
motionless.  Then he dove suddenly and the old man saw flying fish
spurt out of the water and sail desperately over the surface.

"Dolphin," the old man said aloud.  "Big dolphin."

He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under the bow.  It
had a wire leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one of
the sardines.  He let it go over the side and then made it fast to a
ring bolt in the stern.  Then he baited another line and left it coiled
in the shade of the bow.  He went back to rowing and to watching the
long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over the water.

As he watched the bird dipped again slanting his wings for the dive and
then swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed the flying
fish.  The old man could see the slight bulge in the water that the big
dolphin raised as they followed the escaping fish.  The dolphin were
cutting through the water below the flight of the fish and would be in
the water, driving at speed, when the fish dropped.  It is a big school
of dolphin, he thought.  They are wide spread and the flying fish have
little chance.  The bird has no chance.  The flying fish are too big
for him and they go too fast.

He watched the flying fish burst out again and again and the
ineffectual movements of the bird.  That school has gotten away from
me, he thought.  They are moving out too fast and too far.  But perhaps
I will pick up a stray and perhaps my big fish is around them.  My big
fish must be somewhere.

The clouds over the land now rose like mountains and the coast was only
a long green line with the gray blue hills behind it.  The water was a
dark blue now, so dark that it was almost purple.  As he looked down
into it he saw the red sifting of the plankton in the dark water and
the strange light the sun made now.  He watched his lines to see them
go straight down out of sight into the water and he was happy to see so
much plankton because it meant fish.  The strange light the sun made in
the water, now that the sun was higher, meant good weather and so did
the shape of the clouds over the land.  But the bird was almost out of
sight now and nothing showed on the surface of the water but some
patches of yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and the purple,
formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder of a Portuguese man-of-war
floating close beside the boat.  It turned on its side and then righted
itself.  It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple
filaments trailing a yard behind it in the water.

"_Agua mala_," the man said.  "You whore."

From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into the
water and saw the tiny fish that were coloured like the trailing
filaments and swam between them and under the small shade the bubble
made as it drifted.  They were immune to its poison.  But men were not
and when some of the filaments would catch on a line and rest there
slimy and purple while the old man was working a fish, he would have
welts and sores on his arms and hands of the sort that poison ivy or
poison oak can give.  But these poisonings from the _agua mala_ came
quickly and struck like a whiplash.

The iridescent bubbles were beautiful.  But they were the falsest thing
in the sea and the old man loved to see the big sea turtles eating
them.  The turtles saw them, approached them from the front, then shut
their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and
all.  The old man loved to see the turtles eat them and he loved to
walk on them on the beach after a storm and hear them pop when he
stepped on them with the horny soles of his feet.

He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed
and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for the huge,
stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their
love-making, and happily eating the Portuguese men-of-war with their
eyes shut.

He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats
for many years.  He was sorry for them all, even the great trunk backs
that were as long as the skiff and weighed a ton.  Most people are
heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart will beat for hours
after he has been cut up and butchered.  But the old man thought, I
have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs.  He ate
the white eggs to give himself strength.  He ate them all through May
to be strong in September and October for the truly big fish.

He also drank a cup of shark liver oil each day from the big drum in
the shack where many of the fishermen kept their gear.  It was there
for all fishermen who wanted it.  Most fishermen hated the taste.  But
it was no worse than getting up at the hours that they rose and it was
very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for the eyes.

Now the old man looked up and saw that the bird was circling again.

"He's found fish," he said aloud.  No flying fish broke the surface and
there was no scattering of bait fish.  But as the old man watched, a
small tuna rose in the air, turned and dropped head first into the
water.  The tuna shone silver in the sun and after he had dropped back
into the water another and another rose and they were jumping in all
directions, churning the water and leaping in long jumps after the
bait.  They were circling it and driving it.

If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, the old man
thought, and he watched the school working the water white and the bird
now dropping and dipping into the bait fish that were forced to the
surface in their panic.

"The bird is a great help," the old man said.  Just then the stern line
came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop of the line, and he
dropped his oars and felt the weight of the small tuna's shivering pull
as he held the line firm and commenced to haul it in.  The shivering
increased as he pulled in and he could see the blue back of the fish in
the water and the gold of his sides before he swung him over the side
and into the boat.  He lay in the stern in the sun, compact and bullet
shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out
against the planking of the boat with the quick shivering strokes of
his neat, fast-moving tail.  The old man hit him on the head for
kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under the shade of
the stern.

"Albacore," he said aloud.  "He'll make a beautiful bait.  He'll weigh
ten pounds."

He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was
by himself.  He had sung when he was by himself in the old days and he
had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in
the smacks or in the turtle boats.  He had probably started to talk
aloud, when alone, when the boy had left.  But he did not remember.
When he and the boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was
necessary.  They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad
weather.  It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea
and the old man had always considered it so and respected it.  But now
he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they
could annoy.

"If the others heard me talking out loud they would think that I am
crazy," he said aloud.  "But since I am not crazy, I do not care.  And
the rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them
the baseball."

Now is no time to think of baseball, he thought.  Now is the time to
think of only one thing.  That which I was born for.  There might be a
big one around that school, he thought.  I picked up only a straggler
from the albacore that were feeding.  But they are working far out and
fast.  Everything that shows on the surface today travels very fast and
to the north-east.  Can that be the time of day?  Or is it some sign of
weather that I do not know?

He could not see the green of the shore now but only the tops of the
blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and the
clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them.  The sea was
very dark and the light made prisms in the water.  The myriad flecks of
the plankton were annulled now by the high sun and it was only the
great deep prisms in the blue water that the old man saw now with his
lines going straight down into the water that was a mile deep.

The tuna, the fishermen called all the fish of that species tuna and
only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to
sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again.  The sun was hot
now and the old man felt it on the back of his neck and felt the sweat
trickle down his back as he rowed.

I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight of line
around my toe to wake me.  But today is eighty-five days and I should
fish the day well.

Just then, watching his lines, he saw one of the projecting green
sticks dip sharply.

"Yes," he said.  "Yes," and shipped his oars without bumping the boat.
He reached out for the line and held it softly between the thumb and
forefinger of his right hand.  He felt no strain nor weight and he held
the line lightly.  Then it came again.  This time it was a tentative
pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was.  One
hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating the sardines that covered the
point and the shank of the hook where the hand-forged hook projected
from the head of the small tuna.

The old man held the line delicately, and softly, with his left hand,
unleashed it from the stick.  Now he could let it run through his
fingers without the fish feeling any tension.

This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought.  Eat them,
fish.  Eat them.  Please eat them.  How fresh they are and you down
there six hundred feet in that cold water in the dark.  Make another
turn in the dark and come back and eat them.

He felt the light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a
sardine's head must have been more difficult to break from the hook.
Then there was nothing.

"Come on," the old man said aloud.  "Make another turn.  Just smell
them.  Aren't they lovely?  Eat them good now and then there is the
tuna.  Hard and cold and lovely.  Don't be shy, fish.  Eat them."

He waited with the line between his thumb and his finger, watching it
and the other lines at the same time for the fish might have swum up or
down.  Then came the same delicate pulling touch again.

"He'll take it," the old man said aloud.  "God help him to take it."

He did not take it though.  He was gone and the old man felt nothing.

"He can't have gone," he said.  "Christ knows he can't have gone.  He's
making a turn.  Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers
something of it."

Then he felt the gentle touch on the line and he was happy.

"It was only his turn," he said.  "He'll take it."

He was happy feeling the gentle pulling and then he felt something hard
and unbelievably heavy.  It was the weight of the fish and he let the
line slip down, down, down, unrolling off the first of the two reserve
coils.  As it went down, slipping lightly through the old man's
fingers, he still could feel the great weight, though the pressure of
his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible.

"What a fish," he said.  "He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is
moving off with it."

Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought.  He did not say that
because he knew that if you said a good thing it might not happen.  He
knew what a huge fish this was and he thought of him moving away in the
darkness with the tuna held crosswise in his mouth.  At that moment he
felt him stop moving but the weight was still there.  Then the weight
increased and he gave more line.  He tightened the pressure of his
thumb and finger for a moment and the weight increased and was going
straight down.

"He's taken it," he said.  "Now I'll let him eat it well."

He let the line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his
left hand and made fast the free end of the two reserve coils to the
loop of the two reserve coils of the next line.  Now he was ready.  He
had three forty-fathom coils of line in reserve now, as well as the
coil he was using.

"Eat it a little more," he said.  "Eat it well."

Eat it so that the point of the hook goes into your heart and kills
you, he thought.  Come up easy and let me put the harpoon into you.
All right.  Are you ready?  Have you been long enough at table?

"Now!" he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard of
line and then struck again and again, swinging with each arm
alternately on the cord with all the strength of his arms and the
pivoted weight of his body.

Nothing happened.  The fish just moved away slowly and the old man
could not raise him an inch.  His line was strong and made for heavy
fish and he held it against his back until it was so taut that beads of
water were jumping from it.  Then it began to make a slow hissing sound
in the water and he still held it, bracing himself against the thwart
and leaning back against the pull.  The boat began to move slowly off
toward the North-West.

The fish moved steadily and they travelled slowly on the calm water.
The other baits were still in the water but there was nothing to be
done.

"I wish I had the boy," the old man said aloud.  "I'm being towed by a
fish and I'm the towing bitt.  I could make the line fast.  But then he
could break it.  I must hold him all I can and give him line when he
must have it.  Thank God he is travelling and not going down."

What I will do if he decides to go down, I don't know.  What I'll do if
he sounds and dies I don't know.  But I'll do something.  There are
plenty of things I can do.

He held the line against his back and watched its slant in the water
and the skiff moving steadily to the North-West.

This will kill him, the old man thought.  He can't do this forever.
But four hours later the fish was still swimming steadily out to sea,
towing the skiff, and the old man was still braced solidly with the
line across his back.

"It was noon when I hooked him," he said.  "And I have never seen him."

He had pushed his straw hat hard down on his head before he hooked the
fish and it was cutting his forehead.  He was thirsty too and he got
down on his knees and, being careful not to jerk on the line, moved as
far into the bow as he could get and reached the water bottle with one
hand.  He opened it and drank a little.  Then he rested against the
bow.  He rested sitting on the un-stepped mast and sail and tried not
to think but only to endure.

Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible.  That makes
no difference, he thought.  I can always come in on the glow from
Havana.  There are two more hours before the sun sets and maybe he will
come up before that.  If he doesn't maybe he will come up with the
moon.  If he does not do that maybe he will come up with the sunrise.
I have no cramps and I feel strong.  It is he that has the hook in his
mouth.  But what a fish to pull like that.  He must have his mouth shut
tight on the wire.  I wish I could see him.  I wish I could see him
only once to know what I have against me.

The fish never changed his course nor his direction all that night as
far as the man could tell from watching the stars.  It was cold after
the sun went down and the old man's sweat dried cold on his back and
his arms and his old legs.  During the day he had taken the sack that
covered the bait box and spread it in the sun to dry.  After the sun
went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back
and he cautiously worked it down under the line that was across his
shoulders now.  The sack cushioned the line and he had found a way of
leaning forward against the bow so that he was almost comfortable.  The
position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought of
it as almost comfortable.

I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought.
Not as long as he keeps this up.

Once he stood up and urinated over the side of the skiff and looked at
the stars and checked his course.  The line showed like a
phosphorescent streak in the water straight out from his shoulders.
They were moving more slowly now and the glow of Havana was not so
strong, so that he knew the current must be carrying them to the
eastward.  If I lose the glare of Havana we must be going more to the
eastward, he thought.  For if the fish's course held true I must see it
for many more hours.  I wonder how the baseball came out in the grand
leagues today, he thought.  It would be wonderful to do this with a
radio.  Then he thought, think of it always.  Think of what you are
doing.  You must do nothing stupid.

Then he said aloud, "I wish I had the boy.  To help me and to see this."

No one should be alone in their old age, he thought.  But it is
unavoidable.  I must remember to eat the tuna before he spoils in order
to keep strong.  Remember, no matter how little you want to, that you
must eat him in the morning.  Remember, he said to himself.

During the night two porpoise came around the boat and he could hear
them rolling and blowing.  He could tell the difference between the
blowing noise the male made and the sighing blow of the female.

"They are good," he said.  "They play and make jokes and love one
another.  They are our brothers like the flying fish."

Then he began to pity the great fish that he had hooked.  He is
wonderful and strange and who knows how old he is, he thought.  Never
have I had such a strong fish nor one who acted so strangely.  Perhaps
he is too wise to jump.  He could ruin me by jumping or by a wild rush.
But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows that this
is how he should make his fight.  He cannot know that it is only one
man against him, nor that it is an old man.  But what a great fish he
is and what he will bring in the market if the flesh is good.  He took
the bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his fight has no
panic in it.  I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as
desperate as I am?

He remembered the time he had hooked one of a pair of marlin.  The male
fish always let the female fish feed first and the hooked fish, the
female, made a wild, panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon
exhausted her, and all the time the male had stayed with her, crossing
the line and circling with her on the surface.  He had stayed so close
that the old man was afraid he would cut the line with his tail which
was sharp as a scythe and almost of that size and shape.  When the old
man had gaffed her and clubbed her, holding the rapier bill with its
sandpaper edge and clubbing her across the top of her head until her
colour turned to a colour almost like the backing of mirrors, and then,
with the boy's aid, hoisted her aboard, the male fish had stayed by the
side of the boat.  Then, while the old man was clearing the lines and
preparing the harpoon, the male fish jumped high into the air beside
the boat to see where the female was and then went down deep, his
lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his
wide lavender stripes showing.  He was beautiful, the old man
remembered, and he had stayed.

That was the saddest thing I ever saw with them, the old man thought.
The boy was sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly.

"I wish the boy was here," he said aloud and settled himself against
the rounded planks of the bow and felt the strength of the great fish
through the line he held across his shoulders moving steadily toward
whatever he had chosen.

When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a
choice, the old man thought.

His choice had been to stay in the deep dark water far out beyond all
snares and traps and treacheries.  My choice was to go there to find
him beyond all people.  Beyond all people in the world.  Now we are
joined together and have been since noon.  And no one to help either
one of us.

Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought.  But that was
the thing that I was born for.  I must surely remember to eat the tuna
after it gets light.

Some time before daylight something took one of the baits that were
behind him.  He heard the stick break and the line begin to rush out
over the gunwale of the skiff.  In the darkness he loosened his sheath
knife and taking all the strain of the fish on his left shoulder he
leaned back and cut the line against the wood of the gunwale.  Then he
cut the other line closest to him and in the dark made the loose ends
of the reserve coils fast.  He worked skillfully with the one hand and
put his foot on the coils to hold them as he drew his knots tight.  Now
he had six reserve coils of line.  There were two from each bait he had
severed and the two from the bait the fish had taken and they were all
connected.

After it is light, he thought, I will work back to the forty-fathom
bait and cut it away too and link up the reserve coils.  I will have
lost two hundred fathoms of good Catalan _cordel_ and the hooks and
leaders.  That can be replaced.  But who replaces this fish if I hook
some fish and it cuts him off?  I don't know what that fish was that
took the bait just now.  It could have been a marlin or a broadbill or
a shark.  I never felt him.  I had to get rid of him too fast.

Aloud he said, "I wish I had the boy."

But you haven't got the boy, he thought.  You have only yourself and
you had better work back to the last line now, in the dark or not in
the dark, and cut it away and hook up the two reserve coils.

So he did it.  It was difficult in the dark and once the fish made a
surge that pulled him down on his face and made a cut below his eye.
The blood ran down his cheek a little way.  But it coagulated and dried
before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to the bow and
rested against the wood.  He adjusted the sack and carefully worked the
line so that it came across a new part of his shoulders and, holding it
anchored with his shoulders, he carefully felt the pull of the fish and
then felt with his hand the progress of the skiff through the water.

I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought.  The wire must have
slipped on the great hill of his back.  Certainly his back cannot feel
as badly as mine does.  But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no
matter how great he is.  Now everything is cleared away that might make
trouble and I have a big reserve of line; all that a man can ask.

"Fish," he said softly, aloud, "I'll stay with you until I am dead."

He'll stay with me too, I suppose, the old man thought and he waited
for it to be light.  It was cold now in the time before daylight and he
pushed against the wood to be warm.  I can do it as long as he can, he
thought.  And in the first light the line extended out and down into
the water.  The boat moved steadily and when the first edge of the sun
rose it was on the old man's right shoulder.

"He's headed north," the old man said.  The current will have set us
far to the eastward, he thought.  I wish he would turn with the
current.  That would show that he was tiring.

When the sun had risen further the old man realized that the fish was
not tiring.  There was only one favorable sign.  The slant of the line
showed he was swimming at a lesser depth.  That did not necessarily
mean that he would jump.  But he might.

"God let him jump," the old man said.  "I have enough line to handle
him."

Maybe if I can increase the tension just a little it will hurt him and
he will jump, he thought.  Now that it is daylight let him jump so that
he'll fill the sacks along his backbone with air and then he cannot go
deep to die.

He tried to increase the tension, but the line had been taut up to the
very edge of the breaking point since he had hooked the fish and he
felt the harshness as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no
more strain on it.  I must not jerk it ever, he thought.  Each jerk
widens the cut the hook makes and then when he does jump he might throw
it.  Anyway I feel better with the sun and for once I do not have to
look into it.

There was yellow weed on the line but the old man knew that only made
an added drag and he was pleased.  It was the yellow Gulf weed that had
made so much phosphorescence in the night.

"Fish," he said, "I love you and respect you very much.  But I will
kill you dead before this day ends."

Let us hope so, he thought.

A small bird came toward the skiff from the north.  He was a warbler
and flying very low over the water.  The old man could see that he was
very tired.

The bird made the stern of the boat and rested there.  Then he flew
around the old man's head and rested on the line where he was more
comfortable.

"How old are you?" the old man asked the bird.  "Is this your first
trip?"

The bird looked at him when he spoke.  He was too tired even to examine
the line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast.

"It's steady," the old man told him.  "It's too steady.  You shouldn't
be that tired after a windless night.  What are birds coming to?"

The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them.  But he said
nothing of this to the bird who could not understand him anyway and who
would learn about the hawks soon enough.

"Take a good rest, small bird," he said.  "Then go in and take your
chance like any man or bird or fish."

It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in the night
and it hurt truly now.

"Stay at my house if you like, bird," he said.  "I am sorry I cannot
hoist the sail and take you in with the small breeze that is rising.
But I am with a friend."

Just then the fish gave a sudden lurch that pulled the old man down
onto the bow and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced
himself and given some line.

The bird had flown up when the line jerked and the old man had not even
seen him go.  He felt the line carefully with his right hand and
noticed his hand was bleeding.

"Something hurt him then," he said aloud and pulled back on the line to
see if he could turn the fish.  But when he was touching the breaking
point he held steady and settled back against the strain of the line.

"You're feeling it now, fish," he said.  "And so, God knows, am I."

He looked around for the bird now because he would have liked him for
company.  The bird was gone.

You did not stay long, the man thought.  But it is rougher where you
are going until you make the shore.  How did I let the fish cut me with
that one quick pull he made?  I must be getting very stupid.  Or
perhaps I was looking at the small bird and thinking of him.  Now I
will pay attention to my work and then I must eat the tuna so that I
will not have a failure of strength.

"I wish the boy were here and that I had some salt," he said aloud.

Shifting the weight of the line to his left shoulder and kneeling
carefully he washed his hand in the ocean and held it there, submerged,
for more than a minute watching the blood trail away and the steady
movement of the water against his hand as the boat moved.

"He has slowed much," he said.

The old man would have liked to keep his hand in the salt water longer
but he was afraid of another sudden lurch by the fish and he stood up
and braced himself and held his hand up against the sun.  It was only a
line burn that had cut his flesh.  But it was in the working part of
his hand.  He knew he would need his hands before this was over and he
did not like to be cut before it started.

"Now," he said, when his hand had dried, "I must eat the small tuna.  I
can reach him with the gaff and eat him here in comfort."

He knelt down and found the tuna under the stern with the gaff and drew
it toward him keeping it clear of the coiled lines.  Holding the line
with his left shoulder again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he
took the tuna off the gaff hook and put the gaff back in place.  He put
one knee on the fish and cut strips of dark red meat longitudinally
from the back of the head to the tail.  They were wedge-shaped strips
and he cut them from next to the back bone down to the edge of the
belly.  When he had cut six strips he spread them out on the wood of
the bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted the carcass of the
bonito by the tail and dropped it overboard.

"I don't think I can eat an entire one," he said and drew his knife
across one of the strips.  He could feel the steady hard pull of the
line and his left hand was cramped.  It drew up tight on the heavy cord
and he looked at it in disgust.

"What kind of a hand is that," he said.  "Cramp then if you want.  Make
yourself into a claw.  It will do you no good."

Come on, he thought and looked down into the dark water at the slant of
the line.  Eat it now and it will strengthen the hand.  It is not the
hand's fault and you have been many hours with the fish.  But you can
stay with him forever.  Eat the bonito now.

He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly.  It
was not unpleasant.

Chew it well, he thought, and get all the juices.  It would not be bad
to eat with a little lime or with lemon or with salt.

"How do you feel, hand?" he asked the cramped hand that was almost as
stiff as rigor mortis.  "I'll eat some more for you."


He ate the other part of the piece that he had cut in two.  He chewed
it carefully and then spat out the skin.

"How does it go, hand?  Or is it too early to know?"

He took another full piece and chewed it.

"It is a strong full-blooded fish," he thought.  "I was lucky to get
him instead of dolphin.  Dolphin is too sweet.  This is hardly sweet at
all and all the strength is still in it."

There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought.
I wish I had some salt.  And I do not know whether the sun will rot or
dry what is left, so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry.
The fish is calm and steady.  I will eat it all and then I will be
ready.

"Be patient, hand," he said.  "I do this for you."

I wish I could feed the fish, he thought.  He is my brother.  But I
must kill him and keep strong to do it.  Slowly and conscientiously he
ate all of the wedge-shaped strips of fish.

He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers.

"Now," he said.  "You can let the cord go, hand, and I will handle him
with the right arm alone until you stop that nonsense."  He put his
left foot on the heavy line that the left hand had held and lay back
against the pull against his back.

"God help me to have the cramp go," he said.  "Because I do not know
what the fish is going to do."

But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan.  But what is his
plan, he thought.  And what is mine?  Mine I must improvise to his
because of his great size.  If he will jump I can kill him.  But he
stays down forever.  Then I will stay down with him forever.

He rubbed the cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle the
fingers.  But it would not open.  Maybe it will open with the sun, he
thought.  Maybe it will open when the strong raw tuna is digested.  If
I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs.  But I do
not want to open it now by force.  Let it open by itself and come back
of its own accord.  After all I abused it much in the night when it was
necessary to free and unite the various lines.

He looked across the sea and knew how alone he was now.  But he could
see the prisms in the deep dark water and the line stretching ahead and
the strange undulation of the calm.  The clouds were building up now
for the trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a flight of wild ducks
etching themselves against the sky over the water, then blurring, then
etching again and he knew no man was ever alone on the sea.

He thought of how some men feared being out of sight of land in a small
boat and knew they were right in the months of sudden bad weather.  But
now they were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes,
the weather of hurricane months is the best of all the year.

If there is a hurricane you always see the signs of it in the sky for
days ahead, if you are at sea.  They do not see it ashore because they
do not know what to look for, he thought.  The land must make a
difference too, in the shape of the clouds.  But we have no hurricane
coming now.

He looked at the sky and saw the white cumulus built like friendly
piles of ice cream and high above were the thin feathers of the cirrus
against the high September sky.

"Light _brisa_," he said.  "Better weather for me than for you, fish."

His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly.

I hate a cramp, he thought.  It is a treachery of one's own body.  It
is humiliating before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine
poisoning or to vomit from it.  But a cramp, he thought of it as a
_calambre_, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone.

If the boy were here he could rub it for me and loosen it down from the
forearm, he thought.  But it will loosen up.

Then, with his right hand he felt the difference in the pull of the
line before he saw the slant change in the water.  Then, as he leaned
against the line and slapped his left hand hard and fast against his
thigh he saw the line slanting slowly upward.

"He's coming up," he said.  "Come on hand.  Please come on."

The line rose slowly and steadily and then the surface of the ocean
bulged ahead of the boat and the fish came out.  He came out unendingly
and water poured from his sides.  He was bright in the sun and his head
and back were dark purple and in the sun the stripes on his sides
showed wide and a light lavender.  His sword was as long as a baseball
bat and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from the
water and then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and the old man
saw the great scythe-blade of his tail go under and the line commenced
to race out.

"He is two feet longer than the skiff," the old man said.  The line was
going out fast but steadily and the fish was not panicked.  The old man
was trying with both hands to keep the line just inside of breaking
strength.  He knew that if he could not slow the fish with a steady
pressure the fish could take out all the line and break it.

He is a great fish and I must convince him, he thought.  I must never
let him learn his strength nor what he could do if he made his run.  If
I were him I would put in everything now and go until something broke.
But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who kill them;
although they are more noble and more able.

The old man had seen many great fish.  He had seen many that weighed
more than a thousand pounds and he had caught two of that size in his
life, but never alone.  Now alone, and out of sight of land, he was
fast to the biggest fish that he had ever seen and bigger than he had
ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as the gripped
claws of an eagle.

It will uncramp though, he thought.  Surely it will uncramp to help my
right hand.  There are three things that are brothers: the fish and my
two hands.  It must uncramp.  It is unworthy of it to be cramped.  The
fish had slowed again and was going at his usual pace.

I wonder why he jumped, the old man thought.  He jumped almost as
though to show me how big he was.  I know now, anyway, he thought.  I
wish I could show him what sort of man I am.  But then he would see the
cramped hand.  Let him think I am more man than I am and I will be so.
I wish I was the fish, he thought, with everything he has against only
my will and my intelligence.

He settled comfortably against the wood and took his suffering as it
came and the fish swam steadily and the boat moved slowly through the
dark water.  There was a small sea rising with the wind coming up from
the east and at noon the old man's left hand was uncramped.

"Bad news for you, fish," he said and shifted the line over the sacks
that covered his shoulders.

He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit the
suffering at all.

"I am not religious," he said.  "But I will say ten Our Fathers and ten
Hail Marys that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a
pilgrimage to the Virgen de Cobre if I catch him.  That is a promise."

He commenced to say his prayers mechanically.  Sometimes he would be so
tired that he could not remember the prayer and then he would say them
fast so that they would come automatically.  Hail Marys are easier to
say than Our Fathers, he thought.

"Hail Mary full of Grace the Lord is with thee.  Blessed art thou among
women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus.  Holy Mary, Mother
of God, pray for us sinners now and at the hour of our death.  Amen."
Then he added, "Blessed Virgin, pray for the death of this fish.
Wonderful though he is."

With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly
as much, and perhaps a little more, he leaned against the wood of the
bow and began, mechanically, to work the fingers of his left hand.

The sun was hot now although the breeze was rising gently.

"I had better re-bait that little line out over the stern," he said.
"If the fish decides to stay another night I will need to eat again and
the water is low in the bottle.  I don't think I can get anything but a
dolphin here.  But if I eat him fresh enough he won't be bad.  I wish a
flying fish would come on board tonight.  But I have no light to
attract them.  A flying fish is excellent to eat raw and I would not
have to cut him up.  I must save all my strength now.  Christ, I did
not know he was so big."

"I'll kill him though," he said.  "In all his greatness and his glory."

Although it is unjust, he thought.  But I will show him what a man can
do and what a man endures.

"I told the boy I was a strange old man," he said.  "Now is when I must
prove it."

The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing.  Now he was
proving it again.  Each time was a new time and he never thought about
the past when he was doing it.

I wish he'd sleep and I could sleep and dream about the lions, he
thought.  Why are the lions the main thing that is left?  Don't think,
old man, he said to himself.  Rest gently now against the wood and
think of nothing.  He is working.  Work as little as you can.

It was getting into the afternoon and the boat still moved slowly and
steadily.  But there was an added drag now from the easterly breeze and
the old man rode gently with the small sea and the hurt of the cord
across his back came to him easily and smoothly.

Once in the afternoon the line started to rise again.  But the fish
only continued to swim at a slightly higher level.  The sun was on the
old man's left arm and shoulder and on his back.  So he knew the fish
had turned east of north.

Now that he had seen him once, he could picture the fish swimming in
the water with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and the great
erect tail slicing through the dark.  I wonder how much he sees at that
depth, the old man thought.  His eye is huge and a horse, with much
less eye, can see in the dark.  Once I could see quite well in the
dark.  Not in the absolute dark.  But almost as a cat sees.

The sun and his steady movement of his fingers had uncramped his left
hand now completely and he began to shift more of the strain to it and
he shrugged the muscles of his back to shift the hurt of the cord a
little.

"If you're not tired, fish," he said aloud, "you must be very strange."

He felt very tired now and he knew the night would come soon and he
tried to think of other things.  He thought of the Big Leagues, to him
they were the _Gran Ligas_, and he knew that the Yankees of New York
were playing the _Tigres_ of Detroit.

This is the second day now that I do not know the result of the
_juegos_, he thought.  But I must have confidence and I must be worthy
of the great DiMaggio who does all things perfectly even with the pain
of the bone spur in his heel.  What is a bone spur? he asked himself.
_Un espuela de hueso_.  We do not have them.  Can it be as painful as
the spur of a fighting cock in one's heel?  I do not think I could
endure that or the loss of the eye and of both eyes and continue to
fight as the fighting cocks do.  Man is not much beside the great birds
and beasts.  Still I would rather be that beast down there in the
darkness of the sea.

"Unless sharks come," he said aloud.  "If sharks come, God pity him and
me."

Do you believe the great DiMaggio would stay with a fish as long as I
will stay with this one? he thought.  I am sure he would and more since
he is young and strong.  Also his father was a fisherman.  But would
the bone spur hurt him too much?

"I do not know," he said aloud.  "I never had a bone spur."

As the sun set he remembered, to give himself more confidence, the time
in the tavern at Casablanca when he had played the hand game with the
great negro from Cienfuegos who was the strongest man on the docks.
They had gone one day and one night with their elbows on a chalk line
on the table and their forearms straight up and their hands gripped
tight.  Each one was trying to force the other's hand down onto the
table.  There was much betting and people went in and out of the room
under the kerosene lights and he had looked at the arm and hand of the
negro and at the negro's face.  They changed the referees every four
hours after the first eight so that the referees could sleep.  Blood
came out from under the fingernails of both his and the negro's hands
and they looked each other in the eye and at their hands and forearms
and the bettors went in and out of the room and sat on high chairs
against the wall and watched.  The walls were painted bright blue and
were of wood and the lamps threw their shadows against them.  The
negro's shadow was huge and it moved on the wall as the breeze moved
the lamps.

The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed the negro
rum and lighted cigarettes for him.  Then the negro, after the rum,
would try for a tremendous effort and once he had the old man, who was
not an old man then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly three inches
off balance.  But the old man had raised his hand up to dead even
again.  He was sure then that he had the negro, who was a fine man and
a great athlete, beaten.  And at daylight when the bettors were asking
that it be called a draw and the referee was shaking his head, he had
unleashed his effort and forced the hand of the negro down and down
until it rested on the wood.  The match had started on a Sunday morning
and ended on a Monday morning.  Many of the bettors had asked for a
draw because they had to go to work on the docks loading sacks of sugar
or at the Havana Coal Company.  Otherwise everyone would have wanted it
to go to a finish.  But he had finished it anyway and before anyone had
to go to work.

For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and
there had been a return match in the spring.  But not much money was
bet and he had won it quite easily since he had broken the confidence
of the negro from Cienfuegos in the first match.  After that he had a
few matches and then no more.  He decided that he could beat anyone if
he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right
hand for fishing.  He had tried a few practice matches with his left
hand.  But his left hand had always been a traitor and would not do
what he called on it to do and he did not trust it.

The sun will bake it out well now, he thought.  It should not cramp on
me again unless it gets too cold in the night.  I wonder what this
night will bring.

An airplane passed over head on its course to Miami and he watched its
shadow scaring up the schools of flying fish.

"With so much flying fish there should be dolphin," he said, and leaned
back on the line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish.
But he could not and it stayed at the hardness and water-drop shivering
that preceded breaking.  The boat moved ahead slowly and he watched the
airplane until he could no longer see it.

It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought.  I wonder what the
sea looks like from that height?  They should be able to see the fish
well if they do not fly too high.  I would like to fly very slowly at
two hundred fathoms high and see the fish from above.  In the turtle
boats I was in the cross-trees of the mast-head and even at that height
I saw much.  The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their
stripes and their purple spots and you can see all of the school as
they swim.  Why is it that all the fast-moving fish of the dark current
have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots?  The dolphin
looks green of course because he is really golden.  But when he comes
to feed, truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin.
Can it be anger, or the greater speed he makes that brings them out?

Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island of Sargasso weed
that heaved and swung in the light sea as though the ocean were making
love with something under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken by
a dolphin.  He saw it first when it jumped in the air, true gold in the
last of the sun and bending and flapping wildly in the air.  It jumped
again and again in the acrobatics of its fear and he worked his way
back to the stern and crouching and holding the big line with his right
hand and arm, he pulled the dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on
the gained line each time with his bare left foot.  When the fish was
at the stern, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation,
the old man leaned over the stern and lifted the burnished gold fish
with its purple spots over the stern.  Its jaws were working
convulsively in quick bites against the hook and it pounded the bottom
of the skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he
clubbed it across the shining golden head until it shivered and was
still.

The old man unhooked the fish, rebaited the line with another sardine
and tossed it over.  Then he worked his way slowly back to the bow.  He
washed his left hand and wiped it on his trousers.  Then he shifted the
heavy line from his right hand to his left and washed his right hand in
the sea while he watched the sun go into the ocean and the slant of the
big cord.

"He hasn't changed at all," he said.  But watching the movement of the
water against his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower.

"I'll lash the two oars together across the stern and that will slow
him in the night," he said.  "He's good for the night and so am I."

It would be better to gut the dolphin a little later to save the blood
in the meat, he thought.  I can do that a little later and lash the
oars to make a drag at the same time.  I had better keep the fish quiet
now and not disturb him too much at sunset.  The setting of the sun is
a difficult time for all fish.

He let his hand dry in the air then grasped the line with it and eased
himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled forward
against the wood so that the boat took the strain as much, or more,
than he did.

I'm learning how to do it, he thought.  This part of it anyway.  Then
too, remember he hasn't eaten since he took the bait and he is huge and
needs much food.  I have eaten the whole bonito.  Tomorrow I will eat
the dolphin.  He called it _dorado_.  Perhaps I should eat some of it
when I clean it.  It will be harder to eat than the bonito.  But, then,
nothing is easy.

"How do you feel, fish?" he asked aloud.  "I feel good and my left hand
is better and I have food for a night and a day.  Pull the boat, fish."

He did not truly feel good because the pain from the cord across his
back had almost passed pain and gone into a dullness that he
mistrusted.  But I have had worse things than that, he thought.  My
hand is only cut a little and the cramp is gone from the other.  My
legs are all right.  Also now I have gained on him in the question of
sustenance.

It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after the sun sets in
September.  He lay against the worn wood of the bow and rested all that
he could.  The first stars were out.  He did not know the name of Rigel
but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he would have all
his distant friends.

"The fish is my friend too," he said aloud.  "I have never seen or
heard of such a fish.  But I must kill him.  I am glad we do not have
to try to kill the stars."

Imagine if each day a man must try to kill the moon, he thought.  The
moon runs away.  But imagine if a man each day should have to try to
kill the sun?  We were born lucky, he thought.

Then he was sorry for the great fish that had nothing to eat and his
determination to kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him.  How
many people will he feed, he thought.  But are they worthy to eat him?
No, of course not.  There is no one worthy of eating him from the
manner of his behaviour and his great dignity.

I do not understand these things, he thought.  But it is good that we
do not have to try to kill the sun or the moon or the stars.  It is
enough to live on the sea and kill our true brothers.

Now, he thought, I must think about the drag.  It has its perils and
its merits.  I may lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes
his effort and the drag made by the oars is in place and the boat loses
all her lightness.  Her lightness prolongs both our suffering but it is
my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed.  No
matter what passes I must gut the dolphin so he does not spoil and eat
some of him to be strong.

Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady
before I move back to the stern to do the work and make the decision.
In the meantime I can see how he acts and if he shows any changes.  The
oars are a good trick; but it has reached the time to play for safety.
He is much fish still and I saw that the hook was in the corner of his
mouth and he has kept his mouth tight shut.  The punishment of the hook
is nothing.  The punishment of hunger, and that he is against something
that he does not comprehend, is everything.  Rest now, old man, and let
him work until your next duty comes.

He rested for what he believed to be two hours.  The moon did not rise
now until late and he had no way of judging the time.  Nor was he
really resting except comparatively.  He was still bearing the pull of
the fish across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on the
gunwale of the bow and confided more and more of the resistance to the
fish to the skiff itself.

How simple it would be if I could make the line fast, he thought.  But
with one small lurch he could break it.  I must cushion the pull of the
line with my body and at all times be ready to give line with both
hands.

"But you have not slept yet, old man," he said aloud.  "It is half a
day and a night and now another day and you have not slept.  You must
devise a way so that you sleep a little if he is quiet and steady.  If
you do not sleep you might become unclear in the head."

I'm clear enough in the head, he thought.  Too clear.  I am as clear as
the stars that are my brothers.  Still I must sleep.  They sleep and
the moon and the sun sleep and even the ocean sleeps sometimes on
certain days when there is no current and a flat calm.

But remember to sleep, he thought.  Make yourself do it and devise some
simple and sure way about the lines.  Now go back and prepare the
dolphin.  It is too dangerous to rig the oars as a drag if you must
sleep.

I could go without sleeping, he told himself.  But it would be too
dangerous.

He started to work his way back to the stern on his hands and knees,
being careful not to jerk against the fish.  He may be half asleep
himself, he thought.  But I do not want him to rest.  He must pull
until he dies.

Back in the stern he turned so that his left hand held the strain of
the line across his shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with
his right hand.  The stars were bright now and he saw the dolphin
clearly and he pushed the blade of his knife into his head and drew him

out from under the stern.  He put one of his feet on the fish and slit
him quickly from the vent up to the tip of his lower jaw.  Then he put
his knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean
and pulling the gills clear.  He felt the maw heavy and slippery in his
hands and he slit it open.  There were two flying fish inside.  They
were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped the guts
and the gills over the stern.  They sank leaving a trail of
phosphorescence in the water.  The dolphin was cold and a leprous
gray-white now in the starlight and the old man skinned one side of him
while he held his right foot on the fish's head.  Then he turned him
over and skinned the other side and cut each side off from the head
down to the tail.

He slid the carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl
in the water.  But there was only the light of its slow descent.  He
turned then and placed the two flying fish inside the two fillets of
fish and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his way slowly
back to the bow.  His back was bent with the weight of the line across
it and he carried the fish in his right hand.

Back in the bow he laid the two fillets of fish out on the wood with
the flying fish beside them.  After that he settled the line across his
shoulders in a new place and held it again with his left hand resting
on the gunwale.  Then he leaned over the side and washed the flying
fish in the water, noting the speed of the water against his hand.  His
hand was phosphorescent from skinning the fish and he watched the flow
of the water against it.  The flow was less strong and as he rubbed the
side of his hand against the planking of the skiff, particles of
phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern.

"He is tiring or he is resting," the old man said.  "Now let me get
through the eating of this dolphin and get some rest and a little
sleep."

Under the stars and with the night colder all the time he ate half of
one of the dolphin fillets and one of the flying fish, gutted and with
its head cut off.

"What an excellent fish dolphin is to eat cooked," he said.  "And what
a miserable fish raw.  I will never go in a boat again without salt or
limes."

If I had brains I would have splashed water on the bow all day and
drying, it would have made salt, he thought.  But then I did not hook
the dolphin until almost sunset.  Still it was a lack of preparation.
But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated.

The sky was clouding over to the east and one after another the stars
he knew were gone.  It looked now as though he were moving into a great
canyon of clouds and the wind had dropped.

"There will be bad weather in three or four days," he said.  "But not
tonight and not tomorrow.  Rig now to get some sleep, old man, while
the fish is calm and steady."

He held the line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh
against his right hand as he leaned all his weight against the wood of
the bow.  Then he passed the line a little lower on his shoulders and
braced his left hand on it.

My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he thought.  If it
relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake me as the line goes out.  It is
hard on the right hand.  But he is used to punishment.  Even if I sleep
twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good.  He lay forward cramping
himself against the line with all of his body, putting all his weight
onto his right hand, and he was asleep.

He did not dream of the lions but instead of a vast school of porpoises
that stretched for eight or ten miles and it was in the time of their
mating and they would leap high into the air and return into the same
hole they had made in the water when they leaped.

Then he dreamed that he was in the village on his bed and there was a
norther and he was very cold and his right arm was asleep because his
head had rested on it instead of a pillow.

After that he began to dream of the long yellow beach and he saw the
first of the lions come down onto it in the early dark and then the
other lions came and he rested his chin on the wood of the bows where
the ship lay anchored with the evening off-shore breeze and he waited
to see if there would be more lions and he was happy.

The moon had been up for a long time but he slept on and the fish
pulled on steadily and the boat moved into the tunnel of clouds.

He woke with the jerk of his right fist coming up against his face and
the line burning out through his right hand.  He had no feeling of his
left hand but he braked all he could with his right and the line rushed
out.  Finally his left hand found the line and he leaned back against
the line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left
hand was taking all the strain and cutting badly.  He looked back at
the coils of line and they were feeding smoothly.  Just then the fish
jumped making a great bursting of the ocean and then a heavy fall.
Then he jumped again and again and the boat was going fast although
line was still racing out and the old man was raising the strain to
breaking point and raising it to breaking point again and again.  He
had been pulled down tight onto the bow and his face was in the cut
slice of dolphin and he could not move.

This is what we waited for, he thought.  So now let us take it.

Make him pay for the line, he thought.  Make him pay for it.

He could not see the fish's jumps but only heard the breaking of the
ocean and the heavy splash as he fell.  The speed of the line was
cutting his hands badly but he had always known this would happen and
he tried to keep the cutting across the calloused parts and not let the
line slip into the palm nor cut the fingers.

If the boy was here he would wet the coils of line, he thought.  Yes.
If the boy were here.  If the boy were here.

The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was
making the fish earn each inch of it.  Now he got his head up from the
wood and out of the slice of fish that his cheek had crushed.  Then he
was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet.  He was ceding
line but more slowly all the time.  He worked back to where he could
feel with his foot the coils of line that he could not see.  There was
plenty of line still and now the fish had to pull the friction of all
that new line through the water.

Yes, he thought.  And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and
filled the sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to
die where I cannot bring him up.  He will start circling soon and then
I must work on him.  I wonder what started him so suddenly?  Could it
have been hunger that made him desperate, or was he frightened by
something in the night?  Maybe he suddenly felt fear.  But he was such
a calm, strong fish and he seemed so fearless and so confident.  It is
strange.

"You better be fearless and confident yourself, old man," he said.
"You're holding him again but you cannot get line.  But soon he has to
circle."

The old man held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and
stooped down and scooped up water in his right hand to get the crushed
dolphin flesh off of his face.  He was afraid that it might nauseate
him and he would vomit and lose his strength.  When his face was
cleaned he washed his right hand in the water over the side and then
let it stay in the salt water while he watched the first light come
before the sunrise.  He's headed almost east, he thought.  That means
he is tired and going with the current.  Soon he will have to circle.
Then our true work begins.

After he judged that his right hand had been in the water long enough
he took it out and looked at it.  "It is not bad," he said.  "And pain
does not matter to a man."

He took hold of the line carefully so that it did not fit into any of
the fresh line cuts and shifted his weight so that he could put his
left hand into the sea on the other side of the skiff.

"You did not do so badly for something worthless," he said to his left
hand.  "But there was a moment when I could not find you."

Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought.  Perhaps it was my
fault in not training that one properly.  But God knows he has had
enough chances to learn.  He did not do so badly in the night, though,
and he has only cramped once.  If he cramps again let the line cut him
off.

When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he
thought he should chew some more of the dolphin.  But I can't, he told
himself.  It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength
from nausea.  And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it since my face was
in it.  I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad.  But it is
too late to try for strength now through nourishment.  You're stupid,
he told himself.  Eat the other flying fish.

It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand
and ate it chewing the bones carefully and eating all of it down to the
tail.

It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he thought.  At least the
kind of strength that I need.  Now I have done what I can, he thought.
Let him begin to circle and let the fight come.

The sun was rising for the third time since he had put to sea when the
fish started to circle.

He could not see by the slant of the line that the fish was circling.
It was too early for that.  He just felt a faint slackening of the
pressure of the line and he commenced to pull on it gently with his
right hand.  It tightened, as always, but just when he reached the
point where it would break, line began to come in.  He slipped his
shoulders and head from under the line and began to pull in line
steadily and gently.  He used both of his hands in a swinging motion
and tried to do the pulling as much as he could with his body and his
legs.  His old legs and shoulders pivoted with the swinging of the
pulling.

"It is a very big circle," he said.  "But he is circling."

Then the line would not come in any more and he held it until he saw
the drops jumping from it in the sun.  Then it started out and the old
man knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into the dark water.

"He is making the far part of his circle now," he said.  I must hold
all I can, he thought.  The strain will shorten his circle each time.
Perhaps in an hour I will see him.  Now I must convince him and then I
must kill him.

But the fish kept on circling slowly and the old man was wet with sweat
and tired deep into his bones two hours later.  But the circles were
much shorter now and from the way the line slanted he could tell the
fish had risen steadily while he swam.

For an hour the old man had been seeing black spots before his eyes and
the sweat salted his eyes and salted the cut over his eye and on his
forehead.  He was not afraid of the black spots.  They were normal at
the tension that he was pulling on the line.  Twice, though, he had
felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him.

"I could not fail myself and die on a fish like this," he said.  "Now
that I have him coming so beautifully, God help me endure.  I'll say a
hundred Our Fathers and a hundred Hail Marys.  But I cannot say them
now."

Consider them said, he thought.  I'll say them later.

Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on the line he held with
his two hands.  It was sharp and hard-feeling and heavy.

He is hitting the wire leader with his spear, he thought.  That was
bound to come.  He had to do that.  It may make him jump though and I
would rather he stayed circling now.  The jumps were necessary for him
to take air.  But after that each one can widen the opening of the hook
wound and he can throw the hook.

"Don't jump, fish," he said.  "Don't jump."

The fish hit the wire several times more and each time he shook his
head the old man gave up a little line.

I must hold his pain where it is, he thought.  Mine does not matter.  I
can control mine.  But his pain could drive him mad.

After a while the fish stopped beating at the wire and started circling
slowly again.  The old man was gaining line steadily now.  But he felt
faint again.  He lifted some sea water with his left hand and put it on
his head.  Then he put more on and rubbed the back of his neck.

"I have no cramps," he said.  "He'll be up soon and I can last.  You
have to last.  Don't even speak of it."

He kneeled against the bow and, for a moment, slipped the line over his
back again.  I'll rest now while he goes out on the circle and then
stand up and work on him when he comes in, he decided.

It was a great temptation to rest in the bow and let the fish make one
circle by himself without recovering any line.  But when the strain
showed the fish had turned to come toward the boat, the old man rose to
his feet and started the pivoting and the weaving pulling that brought
in all the line he gained.

I'm tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now the trade wind
is rising.  But that will be good to take him in with.  I need that
badly.

"I'll rest on the next turn as he goes out," he said.  "I feel much
better.  Then in two or three turns more I will have him."

His straw hat was far on the back of his head and he sank down into the
bow with the pull of the line as he felt the fish turn.

You work now, fish, he thought.  I'll take you at the turn.

The sea had risen considerably.  But it was a fair-weather breeze and
he had to have it to get home.

"I'll just steer south and west," he said.  "A man is never lost at sea
and it is a long island."

It was on the third turn that he saw the fish first.

He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long to pass under the
boat that he could not believe its length.

"No," he said.  "He can't be that big."

But he was that big and at the end of this circle he came to the
surface only thirty yards away and the man saw his tail out of water.
It was higher than a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above
the dark blue water.  It raked back and as the fish swam just below the
surface the old man could see his huge bulk and the purple stripes that
banded him.  His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread
wide.

On this circle the old man could see the fish's eye and the two gray
sucking fish that swam around him.  Sometimes they attached themselves
to him.  Sometimes they darted off.  Sometimes they would swim easily
in his shadow.  They were each over three feet long and when they swam
fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels.

The old man was sweating now but from something else besides the sun.
On each calm placid turn the fish made he was gaining line and he was
sure that in two turns more he would have a chance to get the harpoon
in.

But I must get him close, close, close, he thought.  I mustn't try for
the head.  I must get the heart.

"Be calm and strong, old man," he said.

On the next circle the fish's back was out but he was a little too far
from the boat.  On the next circle he was still too far away but he was
higher out of water and the old man was sure that by gaining some more
line he could have him alongside.

He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil of light rope was in
a round basket and the end was made fast to the bitt in the bow.

The fish was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and
only his great tail moving.  The old man pulled on him all that he
could to bring him closer.  For just a moment the fish turned a little
on his side.  Then he straightened himself and began another circle.

"I moved him," the old man said.  "I moved him then."

He felt faint again now but he held on the great fish all the strain
that he could.  I moved him, he thought.  Maybe this time I can get him
over.  Pull, hands, he thought.  Hold up, legs.  Last for me, head.
Last for me.  You never went.  This time I'll pull him over.

But when he put all of his effort on, starting it well out before the
fish came alongside and pulling with all his strength, the fish pulled
part way over and then righted himself and swam away.

"Fish," the old man said.  "Fish, you are going to have to die anyway.
Do you have to kill me too?"

That way nothing is accomplished, he thought.  His mouth was too dry to
speak but he could not reach for the water now.  I must get him
alongside this time, he thought.  I am not good for many more turns.
Yes you are, he told himself.  You're good for ever.

On the next turn, he nearly had him.  But again the fish righted
himself and swam slowly away.

You are killing me, fish, the old man thought.  But you have a right
to.  Never have I seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or
more noble thing than you, brother.  Come on and kill me.  I do not
care who kills who.

Now you are getting confused in the head, he thought.  You must keep
your head clear.  Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a
man.  Or a fish, he thought.

"Clear up, head," he said in a voice he could hardly hear.  "Clear up."

Twice more it was the same on the turns.

I do not know, the old man thought.  He had been on the point of
feeling himself go each time.  I do not know.  But I will try it once
more.

He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned the
fish.  The fish righted himself and swam off again slowly with the
great tail weaving in the air.

I'll try it again, the old man promised, although his hands were mushy
now and he could only see well in flashes.

He tried it again and it was the same.  So, he thought, and he felt
himself going before he started; I will try it once again.

He took all his pain and what was left of his strength and his long
gone pride and he put it against the fish's agony and the fish came
over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost
touching the planking of the skiff and started to pass the boat, long,
deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in the water.

The old man dropped the line and put his foot on it and lifted the
harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength,
and more strength he had just summoned, into the fish's side just
behind the great chest fin that rose high in the air to the altitude of
the man's chest.  He felt the iron go in and he leaned on it and drove
it further and then pushed all his weight after it.

Then the fish came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out of
the water showing all his great length and width and all his power and
his beauty.  He seemed to hang in the air above the old man in the
skiff.  Then he fell into the water with a crash that sent spray over
the old man and over all of the skiff.

The old man felt faint and sick and he could not see well.  But he
cleared the harpoon line and let it run slowly through his raw hands
and, when he could see, he saw the fish was on his back with his silver
belly up.  The shaft of the harpoon was projecting at an angle from the
fish's shoulder and the sea was discolouring with the red of the blood
from his heart.  First it was dark as a shoal in the blue water that
was more than a mile deep.  Then it spread like a cloud.  The fish was
silvery and still and floated with the waves.

The old man looked carefully in the glimpse of vision that he had.
Then he took two turns of the harpoon line around the bitt in the bow
and laid his head on his hands.

"Keep my head clear," he said against the wood of the bow.  "I am a
tired old man.  But I have killed this fish which is my brother and now
I must do the slave work."

Now I must prepare the nooses and the rope to lash him alongside, he
thought.  Even if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed
her out, this skiff would never hold him.  I must prepare everything,
then bring him in and lash him well and step the mast and set sail for
home.

He started to pull the fish in to have him alongside so that he could
pass a line through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast
alongside the bow.  I want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to
feel him.  He is my fortune, he thought.  But that is not why I wish to
feel him.  I think I felt his heart, he thought.  When I pushed on the
harpoon shaft the second time.  Bring him in now and make him fast and
get the noose around his tail and another around his middle to bind him
to the skiff.

"Get to work, old man," he said.  He took a very small drink of the
water.  "There is very much slave work to be done now that the fight is
over."

He looked up at the sky and then out to his fish.  He looked at the sun
carefully.  It is not much more than noon, he thought.  And the trade
wind is rising.  The lines all mean nothing now.  The boy and I will
splice them when we are home.

"Come on, fish," he said.  But the fish did not come.  Instead he lay
there wallowing now in the seas and the old man pulled the skiff up
onto him.

When he was even with him and had the fish's head against the bow he
could not believe his size.  But he untied the harpoon rope from the
bitt, passed it through the fish's gills and out his jaws, made a turn
around his sword then passed the rope through the other gill, made
another turn around the bill and knotted the double rope and made it
fast to the bitt in the bow.  He cut the rope then and went astern to
noose the tail.  The fish had turned silver from his original purple
and silver, and the stripes showed the same pale violet colour as his
tail.  They were wider than a man's hand with his fingers spread and
the fish's eye looked as detached as the mirrors in a periscope or as a
saint in a procession.

"It was the only way to kill him," the old man said.  He was feeling
better since the water and he knew he would not go away and his head
was clear.  He's over fifteen hundred pounds the way he is, he thought.
Maybe much more.  If he dresses out two-thirds of that at thirty cents
a pound?

"I need a pencil for that," he said.  "My head is not that clear.  But
I think the great DiMaggio would be proud of me today.  I had no bone
spurs.  But the hands and the back hurt truly."  I wonder what a bone
spur is, he thought.  Maybe we have them without knowing of it.

He made the fish fast to bow and stern and to the middle thwart.  He
was so big it was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside.  He cut a
piece of line and tied the fish's lower jaw against his bill so his
mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possible.  Then
he stepped the mast and, with the stick that was his gaff and with his
boom rigged, the patched sail drew, the boat began to move, and half
lying in the stern he sailed south-west.

He did not need a compass to tell him where south-west was.  He only
needed the feel of the trade wind and the drawing of the sail.  I
better put a small line out with a spoon on it and try and get
something to eat and drink for the moisture.  But he could not find a
spoon and his sardines were rotten.  So he hooked a patch of yellow
gulf weed with the gaff as they passed and shook it so that the small
shrimps that were in it fell onto the planking of the skiff.  There
were more than a dozen of them and they jumped and kicked like sand
fleas.  The old man pinched their heads off with his thumb and
forefinger and ate them chewing up the shells and the tails.  They were
very tiny but he knew they were nourishing and they tasted good.

The old man still had two drinks of water in the bottle and he used
half of one after he had eaten the shrimps.  The skiff was sailing well
considering the handicaps and he steered with the tiller under his arm.
He could see the fish and he had only to look at his hands and feel his
back against the stern to know that this had truly happened and was not
a dream.  At one time when he was feeling so badly toward the end, he
had thought perhaps it was a dream.  Then when he had seen the fish
come out of the water and hang motionless in the sky before he fell, he
was sure there was some great strangeness and he could not believe it.
Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever.

Now he knew there was the fish and his hands and back were no dream.
The hands cure quickly, he thought.  I bled them clean and the salt
water will heal them.  The dark water of the true gulf is the greatest
healer that there is.  All I must do is keep the head clear.  The hands
have done their work and we sail well.  With his mouth shut and his
tail straight up and down we sail like brothers.  Then his head started
to become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing me in or am I
bringing him in?  If I were towing him behind there would be no
question.  Nor if the fish were in the skiff, with all dignity gone,
there would be no question either.  But they were sailing together
lashed side by side and the old man thought, let him bring me in if it
pleases him.  I am only better than him through trickery and he meant
me no harm.

They sailed well and the old man soaked his hands in the salt water and
tried to keep his head clear.  There were high cumulus clouds and
enough cirrus above them so that the old man knew the breeze would last
all night.  The old man looked at the fish constantly to make sure it
was true.  It was an hour before the first shark hit him.

The shark was not an accident.  He had come up from deep down in the
water as the dark cloud of blood had settled and dispersed in the mile
deep sea.  He had come up so fast and absolutely without caution that
he broke the surface of the blue water and was in the sun.  Then he
fell back into the sea and picked up the scent and started swimming on
the course the skiff and the fish had taken.

Sometimes he lost the scent.  But he would pick it up again, or have
just a trace of it, and he swam fast and hard on the course.  He was a
very big Mako shark built to swim as fast as the fastest fish in the
sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws.

His back was as blue as a sword fish's and his belly was silver and his
hide was smooth and handsome.  He was built as a sword fish except for
his huge jaws which were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under the
surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through the water without
wavering.  Inside the closed double lip of his jaws all of his eight
rows of teeth were slanted inwards.  They were not the ordinary
pyramid-shaped teeth of most sharks.  They were shaped like a man's
fingers when they are crisped like claws.  They were nearly as long as
the fingers of the old man and they had razor-sharp cutting edges on
both sides.  This was a fish built to feed on all the fishes in the
sea, that were so fast and strong and well armed that they had no other
enemy.  Now he speeded up as he smelled the fresher scent and his blue
dorsal fin cut the water.

When the old man saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had
no fear at all and would do exactly what he wished.  He prepared the
harpoon and made the rope fast while he watched the shark come on.  The
rope was short as it lacked what he had cut away to lash the fish.

The old man's head was clear and good now and he was full of resolution
but he had little hope.  It was too good to last, he thought.  He took
one look at the great fish as he watched the shark close in.  It might
as well have been a dream, he thought.  I cannot keep him from hitting
me but maybe I can get him.  _Dentuso_, he thought.  Bad luck to your
mother.

The shark closed fast astern and when he hit the fish the old man saw
his mouth open and his strange eyes and the clicking chop of the teeth
as he drove forward in the meat just above the tail.  The shark's head
was out of water and his back was coming out and the old man could hear
the noise of skin and flesh ripping on the big fish when he rammed the
harpoon down onto the shark's head at a spot where the line between his
eyes intersected with the line that ran straight back from his nose.
There were no such lines.  There was only the heavy sharp blue head and
the big eyes and the clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws.  But that
was the location of the brain and the old man hit it.  He hit it with
his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength.
He hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy.

The shark swung over and the old man saw his eye was not alive and then
he swung over once again, wrapping himself in two loops of the rope.
The old man knew that he was dead but the shark would not accept it.
Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws clicking, the
shark plowed over the water as a speed-boat does.  The water was white
where his tail beat it and three-quarters of his body was clear above
the water when the rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped.  The
shark lay quietly for a little while on the surface and the old man
watched him.  Then he went down very slowly.

"He took about forty pounds," the old man said aloud.  He took my
harpoon too and all the rope, he thought, and now my fish bleeds again
and there will be others.

He did not like to look at the fish anymore since he had been
mutilated.  When the fish had been hit it was as though he himself were
hit.

But I killed the shark that hit my fish, he thought.  And he was the
biggest _dentuso_ that I have ever seen.  And God knows that I have
seen big ones.

It was too good to last, he thought.  I wish it had been a dream now
and that I had never hooked the fish and was alone in bed on the
newspapers.

"But man is not made for defeat," he said.  "A man can be destroyed but
not defeated."  I am sorry that I killed the fish though, he thought.
Now the bad time is coming and I do not even have the harpoon.  The
_dentuso_ is cruel and able and strong and intelligent.  But I was more
intelligent that he was.  Perhaps not, he thought.  Perhaps I was only
better armed.

"Don't think, old man," he said aloud.  "Sail on this course and take
it when it comes."

But I must think, he thought.  Because it is all I have left.  That and
baseball.  I wonder how the great DiMaggio would have liked the way I
hit him in the brain?  It was no great thing, he thought.  Any man
could do it.  But do you think my hands were as great a handicap as the
bone spurs?  I cannot know.  I never had anything wrong with my heel
except the time the sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when
swimming and paralyzed the lower leg and made the unbearable pain.

"Think about something cheerful, old man," he said.  "Every minute now
you are closer to home.  You sail lighter for the loss of forty pounds."

He knew quite well the pattern of what could happen when he reached the
inner part of the current.  But there was nothing to be done now.

"Yes there is," he said aloud.  "I can lash my knife to the butt of one
of the oars."

So he did that with the tiller under his arm and the sheet of the sail
under his foot.

"Now," he said.  "I am still an old man.  But I am not unarmed."

The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well.  He watched only the
forward part of the fish and some of his hope returned.

It is silly not to hope, he thought.  Besides I believe it is a sin.
Do not think about sin, he thought.  There are enough problems now
without sin.  Also I have no understanding of it.

I have no understanding of it and I am not sure that I believe in it.
Perhaps it was a sin to kill the fish.  I suppose it was even though I
did it to keep me alive and feed many people.  But then everything is a
sin.  Do not think about sin.  It is much too late for that and there
are people who are paid to do it.  Let them think about it.  You were
born to be a fisherman as the fish was born to be a fish.  San Pedro
was a fisherman as was the father of the great DiMaggio.

But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and
since there was nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought
much and he kept on thinking about sin.  You did not kill the fish only
to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought.  You killed him for
pride and because you are a fisherman.  You loved him when he was alive
and you loved him after.  It you love him, it is not a sin to kill him.
Or is it more?

"You think too much, old man," he said aloud.

But you enjoyed killing the _dentuso_, he thought.  He lives on the
live fish as you do.  He is not a scavenger nor just a moving appetite
as some sharks are.  He is beautiful and noble and knows no fear of
anything.

"I killed him in self-defense," the old man said aloud.  "And I killed
him well."

Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way.
Fishing kills me exactly as it keeps me alive.  The boy keeps me alive,
he thought.  I must not deceive myself too much.

He leaned over the side and pulled loose a piece of the meat of the
fish where the shark had cut him.  He chewed it and noted its quality
and its good taste.  It was firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not
red.  There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring
the highest price in the market.  But there was no way to keep its
scent out of the water and the old man knew that a very bad time was
coming.

The breeze was steady.  It had backed a little further into the
north-east and he knew that meant that it would not fall off.  The old
man looked ahead of him but he could see no sails nor could he see the
hull nor the smoke of any ship.  There were only the flying fish that
went up from his bow sailing away to either side and the yellow patches
of gulf-weed.  He could not even see a bird.

He had sailed for two hours, resting in the stern and sometimes chewing
a bit of the meat from the marlin, trying to rest and to be strong,
when he saw the first of the two sharks.

"_Ay_," he said aloud.  There is no translation for this word and
perhaps it is just a noise such as a man might make, involuntarily,
feeling the nail go through his hands and into the wood.

"_Galanos_," he said aloud.  He had seen the second fin now coming up
behind the first and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by the
brown, triangular fin and the sweeping movements of the tail.  They had
the scent and were excited and in the stupidity of their great hunger
they were losing and finding the scent in their excitement.  But they
were closing all the time.

The old man made the sheet fast and jammed the tiller.  Then he took up
the oar with the knife lashed to it.  He lifted it as lightly as he
could because his hands rebelled at the pain.  Then he opened and
closed them on it lightly to loosen them.  He closed them firmly so
they would take the pain now and would not flinch and watched the
sharks come.  He could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads
now and their white-tipped wide pectoral fins.  They were hateful
sharks, bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when they were
hungry they would bite at an oar or the rudder of a boat.  It was these
sharks that would cut the turtles' legs and flippers off when the
turtles were asleep on the surface, and they would hit a man in the
water, if they were hungry, even if the man had no smell of fish blood
nor of fish slime on him.

"_Ay_," the old man said.  "_Galanos_.  Come on, _Galanos_."

They came.  But they did not come as the Mako had come.  One turned and
went out of sight under the skiff and the old man could feel the skiff
shake as he jerked and pulled on the fish.  The other watched the old
man with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in fast with his half
circle of jaws wide to hit the fish where he had already been bitten.
The line showed clearly on the top of his brown head and back where the
brain joined the spinal cord and the old man drove the knife on the oar
into the juncture, withdrew it, and drove it in again into the shark's
yellow cat-like eyes.  The shark let go of the fish and slid down,
swallowing what he had taken as he died.

The skiff was still shaking with the destruction the other shark was
doing to the fish and the old man let go the sheet so that the skiff
would swing broadside and bring the shark out from under.  When he saw
the shark he leaned over the side and punched at him.  He hit only meat
and the hide was set hard and he barely got the knife in.  The blow
hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too.  But the shark came up
fast with his head out and the old man hit him squarely in the center
of his flat-topped head as his nose came out of water and lay against
the fish.  The old man withdrew the blade and punched the shark exactly
in the same spot again.  He still hung to the fish with his jaws hooked
and the old man stabbed him in his left eye.  The shark still hung
there.

"No?" the old man said and he drove the blade between the vertebrae and
the brain.  It was an easy shot now and he felt the cartilage sever.
The old man reversed the oar and put the blade between the shark's jaws
to open them.  He twisted the blade and as the shark slid loose he
said, "Go on, _galano_.  Slide down a mile deep.  Go see your friend,
or maybe it's your mother."

The old man wiped the blade of his knife and laid down the oar.  Then
he found the sheet and the sail filled and he brought the skiff onto
her course.

"They must have taken a quarter of him and of the best meat," he said
aloud.  "I wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him.  I'm
sorry about it, fish.  It makes everything wrong."  He stopped and he
did not want to look at the fish now.  Drained of blood and awash he
looked the colour of the silver backing of a mirror and his stripes
still showed.

"I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish," he said.  "Neither for you
nor for me.  I'm sorry, fish."

Now, he said to himself.  Look to the lashing on the knife and see if
it has been cut.  Then get your hand in order because there still is
more to come.

"I wish I had a stone for the knife," the old man said after he had
checked the lashing on the oar butt.  "I should have brought a stone."
You should have brought many things, he thought.  But you did not bring
them, old man.  Now is no time to think of what you do not have.  Think
of what you can do with what there is.

"You give me much good counsel," he said aloud.  "I'm tired of it."

He held the tiller under his arm and soaked both his hands in the water
as the skiff drove forward.

"God knows how much that last one took," he said.  "But she's much
lighter now."  He did not want to think of the mutilated under-side of
the fish.  He knew that each of the jerking bumps of the shark had been
meat torn away and that the fish now made a trail for all sharks as
wide as a highway through the sea.

He was a fish to keep a man all winter, he thought.  Don't think of
that.  Just rest and try to get your hands in shape to defend what is
left of him.  The blood smell from my hands means nothing now with all
that scent in the water.  Besides they do not bleed much.  There is
nothing cut that means anything.  The bleeding may keep the left from
cramping.

What can I think of now? he thought.  Nothing.  I must think of nothing
and wait for the next ones.  I wish it had really been a dream, he
thought.  But who knows?  It might have turned out well.

The next shark that came was a single shovel-nose.  He came like a pig
to the trough if a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head
in it.  The old man let him hit the fish and then drove the knife on
the oar down into his brain.  But the shark jerked backwards as he
rolled and the knife blade snapped.

The old man settled himself to steer.  He did not even watch the big
shark sinking slowly in the water, showing first life-size, then small,
then tiny.  That always fascinated the old man.  But he did not even
watch it now.

"I have the gaff now," he said.  "But it will do no good.  I have the
two oars and the tiller and the short club."

Now they have beaten me, he thought.  I am too old to club sharks to
death.  But I will try it as long as I have the oars and the short club
and the tiller.

He put his hands in the water again to soak them.  It was getting late
in the afternoon and he saw nothing but the sea and the sky.  There was
more wind in the sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he
would see land.

"You're tired, old man," he said.  "You're tired inside."

The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset.

The old man saw the brown fins coming along the wide trail the fish
must make in the water.  They were not even quartering on the scent.
They were headed straight for the skiff swimming side by side.

He jammed the tiller, made the sheet fast and reached under the stern
for the club.  It was an oar handle from a broken oar sawed off to
about two and a half feet in length.  He could only use it effectively
with one hand because of the grip of the handle and he took good hold
of it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched the
sharks come.  They were both _galanos_.

I must let the first one get a good hold and hit him on the point of
the nose or straight across the top of the head, he thought.

The two sharks closed together and as he saw the one nearest him open
his jaws and sink them into the silver side of the fish, he raised the
club high and brought it down heavy and slamming onto the top of the
shark's broad head.  He felt the rubbery solidity as the club came
down.  But he felt the rigidity of bone too and he struck the shark
once more hard across the point of the nose as he slid down from the
fish.

The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws
wide.  The old man could see pieces of the meat of the fish spilling
white from the corner of his jaws as he bumped the fish and closed his
jaws.  He swung at him and hit only the head and the shark looked at
him and wrenched the meat loose.  The old man swung the club down on
him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only the heavy solid
rubberiness.

"Come on, _galano_," the old man said.  "Come in again."

The shark came in a rush and the old man hit him as he shut his jaws.
He hit him solidly and from as high up as he could raise the club.
This time he felt the bone at the base of the brain and he hit him
again in the same place while the shark tore the meat loose sluggishly
and slid down from the fish.

The old man watched for him to come again but neither shark showed.
Then he saw one on the surface swimming in circles.  He did not see the
fin of the other.

I could not expect to kill them, he thought.  I could have in my time.
But I have hurt them both badly and neither one can feel very good.  If
I could have used a bat with two hands I could have killed the first
one surely.  Even now, he thought.

He did not want to look at the fish.  He knew that half of him had been
destroyed.  The sun had gone down while he had been in the fight with
the sharks.

"It will be dark soon," he said.  "Then I should see the glow of
Havana.  If I am too far to the eastward I will see the lights of one
of the new beaches."

I cannot be too far out now, he thought.  I hope no one has been too
worried.  There is only the boy to worry, of course.  But I am sure he
would have confidence.  Many of the older fishermen will worry.  Many
others too, he thought.  I live in a good town.

He could not talk to the fish anymore because the fish had been ruined
too badly.  Then something came into his head.

"Half fish," he said.  "Fish that you were.  I am sorry that I went too
far out.  I ruined us both.  But we have killed many sharks, you and I,
and ruined many others.  How many did you ever kill, old fish?  You do
not have that spear on your head for nothing."

He liked to think of the fish and what he could do to a shark if he
were swimming free.  I should have chopped the bill off to fight them
with, he thought.  But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife.

But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon.
Then we might have fought them together.  What will you do now if they
come in the night?  What can you do?

"Fight them," he said.  "I'll fight them until I die."

But in the dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only the wind
and the steady pull of the sail he felt that perhaps he was already
dead.  He put his two hands together and felt the palms.  They were not
dead and he could bring the pain of life by simply opening and closing
them.  He leaned his back against the stern and knew he was not dead.
His shoulders told him.

I have all those prayers I promised if I caught the fish, he thought.
But I am too tired to say them now.  I better get the sack and put it
over my shoulders.

He lay in the stern and steered and watched for the glow to come in the
sky.  I have half of him, he thought.  Maybe I'll have the luck to
bring the forward half in.  I should have some luck.  No, he said.  You
violated your luck when you went too far outside.

"Don't be silly," he said aloud.  "And keep awake and steer.  You may
have much luck yet."

"I'd like to buy some if there's any place they sell it," he said.

What could I buy it with? he asked himself.  Could I buy it with a lost
harpoon and a broken knife and two bad hands?

"You might," he said.  "You tried to buy it with eighty-four days at
sea.  They nearly sold it to you too."

I must not think nonsense, he thought.  Luck is a thing that comes in
many forms and who can recognize her?  I would take some though in any
form and pay what they asked.  I wish I could see the glow from the
lights, he thought.  I wish too many things.  But that is the thing I
wish for now.  He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from
his pain he knew he was not dead.

He saw the reflected glare of the lights of the city at what must have
been around ten o'clock at night.  They were only perceptible at first
as the light is in the sky before the moon rises.  Then they were
steady to see across the ocean which was rough now with the increasing
breeze.  He steered inside of the glow and he thought that now, soon,
he must hit the edge of the stream.

Now it is over, he thought.  They will probably hit me again.  But what
can a man do against them in the dark without a weapon?

He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all of the strained parts
of his body hurt with the cold of the night.  I hope I do not have to
fight again, he thought.  I hope so much I do not have to fight again.

But by midnight he fought and this time he knew the fight was useless.
They came in a pack and he could only see the lines in the water that
their fins made and their phosphorescence as they threw themselves on
the fish.  He clubbed at heads and heard the jaws chop and the shaking
of the skiff as they took hold below.  He clubbed desperately at what
he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize the club and it
was gone.

He jerked the tiller free from the rudder and beat and chopped with it,
holding it in both hands and driving it down again and again.  But they
were up to the bow now and driving in one after the other and together,
tearing off the pieces of meat that showed glowing below the sea as
they turned to come once more.

One came, finally, against the head itself and he knew that it was
over.  He swung the tiller across the shark's head where the jaws were
caught in the heaviness of the fish's head which would not tear.  He
swung it once and twice and again.  He heard the tiller break and he
lunged at the shark with the splintered butt.  He felt it go in and
knowing it was sharp he drove it in again.  The shark let go and rolled
away.  That was the last shark of the pack that came.  There was
nothing more for them to eat.

The old man could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his
mouth.  It was coppery and sweet and he was afraid of it for a moment.
But there was not much of it.

He spat into the ocean and said, "Eat that, _Galanos_.  And make a
dream you've killed a man."

He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back
to the stern and found the jagged end of the tiller would fit in the
slot of the rudder well enough for him to steer.  He settled the sack
around his shoulders and put the skiff on her course.  He sailed
lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings of any kind.  He
was past everything now and he sailed the skiff to make his home port
as well and as intelligently as he could.  In the night sharks hit the
carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from the table.  The old man
paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to anything
except steering.  He only noticed how lightly and how well the skiff
sailed now there was no great weight beside her.

She's good, he thought.  She is sound and not harmed in any way except
for the tiller.  That is easily replaced.

He could feel he was inside the current now and he could see the lights
of the beach colonies along the shore.  He knew where he was now and it
was nothing to get home.

The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought.  Then he added, sometimes.
And the great sea with our friends and our enemies.  And bed, he
thought.  Bed is my friend.  Just bed, he thought.  Bed will be a great
thing.  It is easy when you are beaten, he thought.  I never knew how
easy it was.  And what beat you, he thought.

"Nothing," he said aloud.  "I went out too far."

When he sailed into the little harbour the lights of the Terrace were
out and he knew everyone was in bed.  The breeze had risen steadily and
was blowing strongly now.  It was quiet in the harbour though and he
sailed up onto the little patch of shingle below the rocks.  There was
no one to help him so he pulled the boat up as far as he could.  Then
he stepped out and made her fast to a rock.

He unstepped the mast and furled the sail and tied it.  Then he
shouldered the mast and started to climb.  It was then he knew the
depth of his tiredness.  He stopped for a moment and looked back and
saw in the reflection from the street light the great tail of the fish
standing up well behind the skiff's stern.  He saw the white naked line
of his backbone and the dark mass of the head with the projecting bill
and all the nakedness between.

He started to climb again and at the top he fell and lay for some time
with the mast across his shoulder.  He tried to get up.  But it was too
difficult and he sat there with the mast on his shoulder and looked at
the road.  A cat passed on the far side going about its business and
the old man watched it.  Then he just watched the road.

Finally he put the mast down and stood up.  He picked the mast up and
put it on his shoulder and started up the road.  He had to sit down
five times before he reached his shack.

Inside the shack he leaned the mast against the wall.  In the dark he
found a water bottle and took a drink.  Then he lay down on the bed.
He pulled the blanket over his shoulders and then over his back and
legs and he slept face down on the newspapers with his arms out
straight and the palms of his hands up.

He was asleep when the boy looked in the door in the morning.  It was
blowing so hard that the drifting-boats would not be going out and the
boy had slept late and then come to the old man's shack as he had come
each morning.  The boy saw that the old man was breathing and then he
saw the old man's hands and he started to cry.  He went out very
quietly to go to bring some coffee and all the way down the road he was
crying.

Many fishermen were around the skiff looking at what was lashed beside
it and one was in the water, his trousers rolled up, measuring the
skeleton with a length of line.

The boy did not go down.  He had been there before and one of the
fishermen was looking after the skiff for him.

"How is he?" one of the fishermen shouted.

"Sleeping," the boy called.  He did not care that they saw him crying.
"Let no one disturb him."

"He was eighteen feet from nose to tail," the fisherman who was
measuring him called.

"I believe it," the boy said.

He went into the Terrace and asked for a can of coffee.

"Hot and with plenty of milk and sugar in it."

"Anything more?"

"No.  Afterwards I will see what he can eat."

"What a fish it was," the proprietor said.  "There has never been such
a fish.  Those were two fine fish you took yesterday too."

"Damn my fish," the boy said and he started to cry again.

"Do you want a drink of any kind?" the proprietor asked.

"No," the boy said.  "Tell them not to bother Santiago.  I'll be back."

"Tell him how sorry I am."

"Thanks," the boy said.

The boy carried the hot can of coffee up to the old man's shack and sat
by him until he woke.  Once it looked as though he were waking.  But he
had gone back into heavy sleep and the boy had gone across the road to
borrow some wood to heat the coffee.

Finally the old man woke.

"Don't sit up," the boy said.  "Drink this."  He poured some of the
coffee in a glass.

The old man took it and drank it.

"They beat me, Manolin," he said.  "They truly beat me."

"He didn't beat you.  Not the fish."

"No.  Truly.  It was afterwards."

"Pedrico is looking after the skiff and the gear.  What do you want
done with the head?"

"Let Pedrico chop it up to use in fish traps."

"And the spear?"

"You keep it if you want it."

"I want it," the boy said.  "Now we must make our plans about the other
things."

"Did they search for me?"

"Of course.  With coast guard and with planes."

"The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see," the old
man said.  He noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to
instead of speaking only to himself and to the sea.  "I missed you," he
said.  "What did you catch?"

"One the first day.  One the second and two the third."

"Very good."

"Now we fish together again."

"No.  I am not lucky.  I am not lucky anymore."

"The hell with luck," the boy said.  "I'll bring the luck with me."

"What will your family say?"

"I do not care.  I caught two yesterday.  But we will fish together now
for I still have much to learn."

"We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board.  You can
make the blade from a spring leaf from an old Ford.  We can grind it in
Guanabacoa.  It should be sharp and not tempered so it will break.  My
knife broke."

"I'll get another knife and have the spring ground.  How many days of
heavy _brisa_ have we?"

"Maybe three.  Maybe more."

"I will have everything in order," the boy said.  "You get your hands
well old man."

"I know how to care for them.  In the night I spat something strange
and felt something in my chest was broken."

"Get that well too," the boy said.  "Lie down, old man, and I will
bring you your clean shirt.  And something to eat."

"Bring any of the papers of the time that I was gone," the old man said.

"You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can
teach me everything.  How much did you suffer?"

"Plenty," the old man said.

"I'll bring the food and the papers," the boy said.  "Rest well, old
man.  I will bring stuff from the drug-store for your hands."

"Don't forget to tell Pedrico the head is his."

"No.  I will remember."

As the boy went out the door and down the worn coral rock road he was
crying again.

That afternoon there was a party of tourists at the Terrace and looking
down in the water among the empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman
saw a great long white spine with a huge tail at the end that lifted
and swung with the tide while the east wind blew a heavy steady sea
outside the entrance to the harbour.

"What's that?" she asked a waiter and pointed to the long backbone of
the great fish that was now just garbage waiting to go out with the
tide.

"Tiburon," the waiter said, "Eshark."  He was meaning to explain what
had happened.

"I didn't know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails."

"I didn't either," her male companion said.

Up the road, in his shack, the old man was sleeping again.  He was
still sleeping on his face and the boy was sitting by him watching him.
The old man was dreaming about the lions.




_BOOKS BY_

ERNEST HEMINGWAY


  THE OLD MAN AND THE SEA
  ACROSS THE RIVER AND INTO THE TREES
  FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS
  THE FIFTH COLUMN
      AND
  THE FIRST FORTY-NINE STORIES
  TO HAVE AND HAVE NOT
  GREEN HILLS OF AFRICA
  WINNER TAKE NOTHING
  DEATH IN THE AFTERNOON
  A FAREWELL TO ARMS
  MEN WITHOUT WOMEN
  THE SUN ALSO RISES
  THE TORRENTS OF SPRING
  IN OUR TIME


_CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS_




[End of The Old Man and the Sea, by Ernest Hemingway]





                                 ERNEST
                               HEMINGWAY



                                The Sun
                               Also Rises




    ”You are all a lost generation.”

                                 —GERTRUDE STEIN _in conversation_

    ”One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh; but
    the earth abideth forever. . . . The sun also ariseth, and the
    sun goeth down, and hasteth to the place where he arose. . . .
    The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the
    north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth
    again according to his circuits. . . . All the rivers run into
    the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the
    rivers come, thither they return again.”

                                                   —_Ecclesiastes_




                                 BOOK I




                                CHAPTER
                                   1


Robert Cohn was once middleweight boxing champion of Princeton. Do not
think that I am very much impressed by that as a boxing title, but it
meant a lot to Cohn. He cared nothing for boxing, in fact he disliked
it, but he learned it painfully and thoroughly to counteract the feeling
of inferiority and shyness he had felt on being treated as a Jew at
Princeton. There was a certain inner comfort in knowing he could knock
down anybody who was snooty to him, although, being very shy and a
thoroughly nice boy, he never fought except in the gym. He was Spider
Kelly’s star pupil. Spider Kelly taught all his young gentlemen to box
like featherweights, no matter whether they weighed one hundred and five
or two hundred and five pounds. But it seemed to fit Cohn. He was really
very fast. He was so good that Spider promptly overmatched him and got
his nose permanently flattened. This increased Cohn’s distaste for
boxing, but it gave him a certain satisfaction of some strange sort, and
it certainly improved his nose. In his last year at Princeton he read
too much and took to wearing spectacles. I never met any one of his
class who remembered him. They did not even remember that he was
middleweight boxing champion.

I mistrust all frank and simple people, especially when their stories
hold together, and I always had a suspicion that perhaps Robert Cohn had
never been middleweight boxing champion, and that perhaps a horse had
stepped on his face, or that maybe his mother had been frightened or
seen something, or that he had, maybe, bumped into something as a young
child, but I finally had somebody verify the story from Spider Kelly.
Spider Kelly not only remembered Cohn. He had often wondered what had
become of him.

Robert Cohn was a member, through his father, of one of the richest
Jewish families in New York, and through his mother of one of the
oldest. At the military school where he prepped for Princeton, and
played a very good end on the football team, no one had made him
race-conscious. No one had ever made him feel he was a Jew, and hence
any different from anybody else, until he went to Princeton. He was a
nice boy, a friendly boy, and very shy, and it made him bitter. He took
it out in boxing, and he came out of Princeton with painful
self-consciousness and the flattened nose, and was married by the first
girl who was nice to him. He was married five years, had three children,
lost most of the fifty thousand dollars his father left him, the balance
of the estate having gone to his mother, hardened into a rather
unattractive mould under domestic unhappiness with a rich wife; and just
when he had made up his mind to leave his wife she left him and went off
with a miniature-painter. As he had been thinking for months about
leaving his wife and had not done it because it would be too cruel to
deprive her of himself, her departure was a very healthful shock.

The divorce was arranged and Robert Cohn went out to the Coast. In
California he fell among literary people and, as he still had a little
of the fifty thousand left, in a short time he was backing a review of
the Arts. The review commenced publication in Carmel, California, and
finished in Provincetown, Massachusetts. By that time Cohn, who had been
regarded purely as an angel, and whose name had appeared on the
editorial page merely as a member of the advisory board, had become the
sole editor. It was his money and he discovered he liked the authority
of editing. He was sorry when the magazine became too expensive and he
had to give it up.

By that time, though, he had other things to worry about. He had been
taken in hand by a lady who hoped to rise with the magazine. She was
very forceful, and Cohn never had a chance of not being taken in hand.
Also he was sure that he loved her. When this lady saw that the magazine
was not going to rise, she became a little disgusted with Cohn and
decided that she might as well get what there was to get while there was
still something available, so she urged that they go to Europe, where
Cohn could write. They came to Europe, where the lady had been educated,
and stayed three years. During these three years, the first spent in
travel, the last two in Paris, Robert Cohn had two friends, Braddocks
and myself. Braddocks was his literary friend. I was his tennis friend.

The lady who had him, her name was Frances, found toward the end of the
second year that her looks were going, and her attitude toward Robert
changed from one of careless possession and exploitation to the absolute
determination that he should marry her. During this time Robert’s mother
had settled an allowance on him, about three hundred dollars a month.
During two years and a half I do not believe that Robert Cohn looked at
another woman. He was fairly happy, except that, like many people living
in Europe, he would rather have been in America, and he had discovered
writing. He wrote a novel, and it was not really such a bad novel as the
critics later called it, although it was a very poor novel. He read many
books, played bridge, played tennis, and boxed at a local gymnasium.

I first became aware of his lady’s attitude toward him one night after
the three of us had dined together. We had dined at l’Avenue’s and
afterward went to the Café de Versailles for coffee. We had several
_fines_ after the coffee, and I said I must be going. Cohn had been
talking about the two of us going off somewhere on a weekend trip. He
wanted to get out of town and get in a good walk. I suggested we fly to
Strasbourg and walk up to Saint Odile, or somewhere or other in Alsace.
“I know a girl in Strasbourg who can show us the town,” I said.

Somebody kicked me under the table. I thought it was accidental and went
on: “She’s been there two years and knows everything there is to know
about the town. She’s a swell girl.”

I was kicked again under the table and, looking, saw Frances, Robert’s
lady, her chin lifting and her face hardening.

“Hell,” I said, “why go to Strasbourg? We could go up to Bruges, or to
the Ardennes.”

Cohn looked relieved. I was not kicked again. I said good-night and went
out. Cohn said he wanted to buy a paper and would walk to the corner
with me. “For God’s sake,” he said, “why did you say that about that
girl in Strasbourg for? Didn’t you see Frances?”

“No, why should I? If I know an American girl that lives in Strasbourg
what the hell is it to Frances?”

“It doesn’t make any difference. Any girl. I couldn’t go, that would be
all.”

“Don’t be silly.”

“You don’t know Frances. Any girl at all. Didn’t you see the way she
looked?”

“Oh, well,” I said, “let’s go to Senlis.”

“Don’t get sore.”

“I’m not sore. Senlis is a good place and we can stay at the Grand Cerf
and take a hike in the woods and come home.”

“Good, that will be fine.”

“Well, I’ll see you to-morrow at the courts,” I said.

“Good-night, Jake,” he said, and started back to the café.

“You forgot to get your paper,” I said.

“That’s so.” He walked with me up to the kiosque at the corner. “You are
not sore, are you, Jake?” He turned with the paper in his hand.

“No, why should I be?”

“See you at tennis,” he said. I watched him walk back to the café
holding his paper. I rather liked him and evidently she led him quite a
life.




                                CHAPTER
                                   2


That winter Robert Cohn went over to America with his novel, and it was
accepted by a fairly good publisher. His going made an awful row I
heard, and I think that was where Frances lost him, because several
women were nice to him in New York, and when he came back he was quite
changed. He was more enthusiastic about America than ever, and he was
not so simple, and he was not so nice. The publishers had praised his
novel pretty highly and it rather went to his head. Then several women
had put themselves out to be nice to him, and his horizons had all
shifted. For four years his horizon had been absolutely limited to his
wife. For three years, or almost three years, he had never seen beyond
Frances. I am sure he had never been in love in his life.

He had married on the rebound from the rotten time he had in college,
and Frances took him on the rebound from his discovery that he had not
been everything to his first wife. He was not in love yet but he
realized that he was an attractive quantity to women, and that the fact
of a woman caring for him and wanting to live with him was not simply a
divine miracle. This changed him so that he was not so pleasant to have
around. Also, playing for higher stakes than he could afford in some
rather steep bridge games with his New York connections, he had held
cards and won several hundred dollars. It made him rather vain of his
bridge game, and he talked several times of how a man could always make
a living at bridge if he were ever forced to.

Then there was another thing. He had been reading W. H. Hudson. That
sounds like an innocent occupation, but Cohn had read and reread “The
Purple Land.” “The Purple Land” is a very sinister book if read too late
in life. It recounts splendid imaginary amorous adventures of a perfect
English gentleman in an intensely romantic land, the scenery of which is
very well described. For a man to take it at thirty-four as a guide-book
to what life holds is about as safe as it would be for a man of the same
age to enter Wall Street direct from a French convent, equipped with a
complete set of the more practical Alger books. Cohn, I believe, took
every word of “The Purple Land” as literally as though it had been an
R. G. Dun report. You understand me, he made some reservations, but on
the whole the book to him was sound. It was all that was needed to set
him off. I did not realize the extent to which it had set him off until
one day he came into my office.

“Hello, Robert,” I said. “Did you come in to cheer me up?”

“Would you like to go to South America, Jake?” he asked.

“No.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. I never wanted to go. Too expensive. You can see all the
South Americans you want in Paris anyway.”

“They’re not the real South Americans.”

“They look awfully real to me.”

I had a boat train to catch with a week’s mail stories, and only half of
them written.

“Do you know any dirt?” I asked.

“No.”

“None of your exalted connections getting divorces?”

“No; listen, Jake. If I handled both our expenses, would you go to South
America with me?”

“Why me?”

“You can talk Spanish. And it would be more fun with two of us.”

“No,” I said, “I like this town and I go to Spain in the summer-time.”

“All my life I’ve wanted to go on a trip like that,” Cohn said. He sat
down. “I’ll be too old before I can ever do it.”

“Don’t be a fool,” I said. “You can go anywhere you want. You’ve got
plenty of money.”

“I know. But I can’t get started.”

“Cheer up,” I said. “All countries look just like the moving pictures.”

But I felt sorry for him. He had it badly.

“I can’t stand it to think my life is going so fast and I’m not really
living it.”

“Nobody ever lives their life all the way up except bull-fighters.”

“I’m not interested in bull-fighters. That’s an abnormal life. I want to
go back in the country in South America. We could have a great trip.”

“Did you ever think about going to British East Africa to shoot?”

“No, I wouldn’t like that.”

“I’d go there with you.”

“No; that doesn’t interest me.”

“That’s because you never read a book about it. Go on and read a book
all full of love affairs with the beautiful shiny black princesses.”

“I want to go to South America.”

He had a hard, Jewish, stubborn streak.

“Come on down-stairs and have a drink.”

“Aren’t you working?”

“No,” I said. We went down the stairs to the café on the ground floor. I
had discovered that was the best way to get rid of friends. Once you had
a drink all you had to say was: “Well, I’ve got to get back and get off
some cables,” and it was done. It is very important to discover graceful
exits like that in the newspaper business, where it is such an important
part of the ethics that you should never seem to be working. Anyway, we
went down-stairs to the bar and had a whiskey and soda. Cohn looked at
the bottles in bins around the wall. “This is a good place,” he said.

“There’s a lot of liquor,” I agreed.

“Listen, Jake,” he leaned forward on the bar. “Don’t you ever get the
feeling that all your life is going by and you’re not taking advantage
of it? Do you realize you’ve lived nearly half the time you have to live
already?”

“Yes, every once in a while.”

“Do you know that in about thirty-five years more we’ll be dead?”

“What the hell, Robert,” I said. “What the hell.”

“I’m serious.”

“It’s one thing I don’t worry about,” I said.

“You ought to.”

“I’ve had plenty to worry about one time or other. I’m through
worrying.”

“Well, I want to go to South America.”

“Listen, Robert, going to another country doesn’t make any difference.
I’ve tried all that. You can’t get away from yourself by moving from one
place to another. There’s nothing to that.”

“But you’ve never been to South America.”

“South America hell! If you went there the way you feel now it would be
exactly the same. This is a good town. Why don’t you start living your
life in Paris?”

“I’m sick of Paris, and I’m sick of the Quarter.”

“Stay away from the Quarter. Cruise around by yourself and see what
happens to you.”

“Nothing happens to me. I walked alone all one night and nothing
happened except a bicycle cop stopped me and asked to see my papers.”

“Wasn’t the town nice at night?”

“I don’t care for Paris.”

So there you were. I was sorry for him, but it was not a thing you could
do anything about, because right away you ran up against the two
stubbornnesses: South America could fix it and he did not like Paris. He
got the first idea out of a book, and I suppose the second came out of a
book too.

“Well,” I said, “I’ve got to go up-stairs and get off some cables.”

“Do you really have to go?”

“Yes, I’ve got to get these cables off.”

“Do you mind if I come up and sit around the office?”

“No, come on up.”

He sat in the outer room and read the papers, and the Editor and
Publisher and I worked hard for two hours. Then I sorted out the
carbons, stamped on a by-line, put the stuff in a couple of big manila
envelopes and rang for a boy to take them to the Gare St. Lazare. I went
out into the other room and there was Robert Cohn asleep in the big
chair. He was asleep with his head on his arms. I did not like to wake
him up, but I wanted to lock the office and shove off. I put my hand on
his shoulder. He shook his head. “I can’t do it,” he said, and put his
head deeper into his arms. “I can’t do it. Nothing will make me do it.”

“Robert,” I said, and shook him by the shoulder. He looked up. He smiled
and blinked.

“Did I talk out loud just then?”

“Something. But it wasn’t clear.”

“God, what a rotten dream!”

“Did the typewriter put you to sleep?”

“Guess so. I didn’t sleep all last night.”

“What was the matter?”

“Talking,” he said.

I could picture it. I have a rotten habit of picturing the bedroom
scenes of my friends. We went out to the Café Napolitain to have an
_apéritif_ and watch the evening crowd on the Boulevard.




                                CHAPTER
                                   3


It was a warm spring night and I sat at a table on the terrace of the
Napolitain after Robert had gone, watching it get dark and the electric
signs come on, and the red and green stop-and-go traffic-signal, and the
crowd going by, and the horse-cabs clippety-clopping along at the edge
of the solid taxi traffic, and the _poules_ going by, singly and in
pairs, looking for the evening meal. I watched a good-looking girl walk
past the table and watched her go up the street and lost sight of her,
and watched another, and then saw the first one coming back again. She
went by once more and I caught her eye, and she came over and sat down
at the table. The waiter came up.

“Well, what will you drink?” I asked.

“Pernod.”

“That’s not good for little girls.”

“Little girl yourself. Dites garçon, un pernod.”

“A pernod for me, too.”

“What’s the matter?” she asked. “Going on a party?”

“Sure. Aren’t you?”

“I don’t know. You never know in this town.”

“Don’t you like Paris?”

“No.”

“Why don’t you go somewhere else?”

“Isn’t anywhere else.”

“You’re happy, all right.”

“Happy, hell!”

Pernod is greenish imitation absinthe. When you add water it turns
milky. It tastes like licorice and it has a good uplift, but it drops
you just as far. We sat and drank it, and the girl looked sullen.

“Well,” I said, “are you going to buy me a dinner?”

She grinned and I saw why she made a point of not laughing. With her
mouth closed she was a rather pretty girl. I paid for the saucers and we
walked out to the street. I hailed a horse-cab and the driver pulled up
at the curb. Settled back in the slow, smoothly rolling _fiacre_ we
moved up the Avenue de l’Opéra, passed the locked doors of the shops,
their windows lighted, the Avenue broad and shiny and almost deserted.
The cab passed the New York _Herald_ bureau with the window full of
clocks.

“What are all the clocks for?” she asked.

“They show the hour all over America.”

“Don’t kid me.”

We turned off the Avenue up the Rue des Pyramides, through the traffic
of the Rue de Rivoli, and through a dark gate into the Tuileries. She
cuddled against me and I put my arm around her. She looked up to be
kissed. She touched me with one hand and I put her hand away.

“Never mind.”

“What’s the matter? You sick?”

“Yes.”

“Everybody’s sick. I’m sick, too.”

We came out of the Tuileries into the light and crossed the Seine and
then turned up the Rue des Saints Pères.

“You oughtn’t to drink pernod if you’re sick.”

“You neither.”

“It doesn’t make any difference with me. It doesn’t make any difference
with a woman.”

“What are you called?”

“Georgette. How are you called?”

“Jacob.”

“That’s a Flemish name.”

“American too.”

“You’re not Flamand?”

“No, American.”

“Good, I detest Flamands.”

By this time we were at the restaurant. I called to the _cocher_ to
stop. We got out and Georgette did not like the looks of the place.
“This is no great thing of a restaurant.”

“No,” I said. “Maybe you would rather go to Foyot’s. Why don’t you keep
the cab and go on?”

I had picked her up because of a vague sentimental idea that it would be
nice to eat with some one. It was a long time since I had dined with a
_poule_, and I had forgotten how dull it could be. We went into the
restaurant, passed Madame Lavigne at the desk and into a little room.
Georgette cheered up a little under the food.

“It isn’t bad here,” she said. “It isn’t chic, but the food is all
right.”

“Better than you eat in Liège.”

“Brussels, you mean.”

We had another bottle of wine and Georgette made a joke. She smiled and
showed all her bad teeth, and we touched glasses. “You’re not a bad
type,” she said. “It’s a shame you’re sick. We get on well. What’s the
matter with you, anyway?”

“I got hurt in the war,” I said.

“Oh, that dirty war.”

We would probably have gone on and discussed the war and agreed that it
was in reality a calamity for civilization, and perhaps would have been
better avoided. I was bored enough. Just then from the other room some
one called: “Barnes! I say, Barnes! Jacob Barnes!”

“It’s a friend calling me,” I explained, and went out.

There was Braddocks at a big table with a party: Cohn, Frances Clyne,
Mrs. Braddocks, several people I did not know.

“You’re coming to the dance, aren’t you?” Braddocks asked.

“What dance?”

“Why, the dancings. Don’t you know we’ve revived them?” Mrs. Braddocks
put in.

“You must come, Jake. We’re all going,” Frances said from the end of the
table. She was tall and had a smile.

“Of course, he’s coming,” Braddocks said. “Come in and have coffee with
us, Barnes.”

“Right.”

“And bring your friend,” said Mrs. Braddocks laughing. She was a
Canadian and had all their easy social graces.

“Thanks, we’ll be in,” I said. I went back to the small room.

“Who are your friends?” Georgette asked.

“Writers and artists.”

“There are lots of those on this side of the river.”

“Too many.”

“I think so. Still, some of them make money.”

“Oh, yes.”

We finished the meal and the wine. “Come on,” I said. “We’re going to
have coffee with the others.”

Georgette opened her bag, made a few passes at her face as she looked in
the little mirror, re-defined her lips with the lipstick, and
straightened her hat.

“Good,” she said.

We went into the room full of people and Braddocks and the men at his
table stood up.

“I wish to present my fiancée, Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc,” I said.
Georgette smiled that wonderful smile, and we shook hands all round.

“Are you related to Georgette Leblanc, the singer?” Mrs. Braddocks
asked.

“Connais pas,” Georgette answered.

“But you have the same name,” Mrs. Braddocks insisted cordially.

“No,” said Georgette. “Not at all. My name is Hobin.”

“But Mr. Barnes introduced you as Mademoiselle Georgette Leblanc. Surely
he did,” insisted Mrs. Braddocks, who in the excitement of talking
French was liable to have no idea what she was saying.

“He’s a fool,” Georgette said.

“Oh, it was a joke, then,” Mrs. Braddocks said.

“Yes,” said Georgette. “To laugh at.”

“Did you hear that, Henry?” Mrs. Braddocks called down the table to
Braddocks. “Mr. Barnes introduced his fiancée as Mademoiselle Leblanc,
and her name is actually Hobin.”

“Of course, darling. Mademoiselle Hobin, I’ve known her for a very long
time.”

“Oh, Mademoiselle Hobin,” Frances Clyne called, speaking French very
rapidly and not seeming so proud and astonished as Mrs. Braddocks at its
coming out really French. “Have you been in Paris long? Do you like it
here? You love Paris, do you not?”

“Who’s she?” Georgette turned to me. “Do I have to talk to her?”

She turned to Frances, sitting smiling, her hands folded, her head
poised on her long neck, her lips pursed ready to start talking again.

“No, I don’t like Paris. It’s expensive and dirty.”

“Really? I find it so extraordinarily clean. One of the cleanest cities
in all Europe.”

“I find it dirty.”

“How strange! But perhaps you have not been here very long.”

“I’ve been here long enough.”

“But it does have nice people in it. One must grant that.”

Georgette turned to me. “You have nice friends.”

Frances was a little drunk and would have liked to have kept it up but
the coffee came, and Lavigne with the liqueurs, and after that we all
went out and started for Braddocks’s dancing-club.

The dancing-club was a _bal musette_ in the Rue de la Montagne Sainte
Geneviève. Five nights a week the working people of the Pantheon quarter
danced there. One night a week it was the dancing-club. On Monday nights
it was closed. When we arrived it was quite empty, except for a
policeman sitting near the door, the wife of the proprietor back of the
zinc bar, and the proprietor himself. The daughter of the house came
downstairs as we went in. There were long benches, and tables ran across
the room, and at the far end a dancing-floor.

“I wish people would come earlier,” Braddocks said. The daughter came up
and wanted to know what we would drink. The proprietor got up on a high
stool beside the dancing-floor and began to play the accordion. He had a
string of bells around one of his ankles and beat time with his foot as
he played. Every one danced. It was hot and we came off the floor
perspiring.

“My God,” Georgette said. “What a box to sweat in!”

“It’s hot.”

“Hot, my God!”

“Take off your hat.”

“That’s a good idea.”

Some one asked Georgette to dance, and I went over to the bar. It was
really very hot and the accordion music was pleasant in the hot night. I
drank a beer, standing in the doorway and getting the cool breath of
wind from the street. Two taxis were coming down the steep street. They
both stopped in front of the Bal. A crowd of young men, some in jerseys
and some in their shirt-sleeves, got out. I could see their hands and
newly washed, wavy hair in the light from the door. The policeman
standing by the door looked at me and smiled. They came in. As they went
in, under the light I saw white hands, wavy hair, white faces,
grimacing, gesturing, talking. With them was Brett. She looked very
lovely and she was very much with them.

One of them saw Georgette and said: “I do declare. There is an actual
harlot. I’m going to dance with her, Lett. You watch me.”

The tall dark one, called Lett, said: “Don’t you be rash.”

The wavy blond one answered: “Don’t you worry, dear.” And with them was
Brett.

I was very angry. Somehow they always made me angry. I know they are
supposed to be amusing, and you should be tolerant, but I wanted to
swing on one, any one, anything to shatter that superior, simpering
composure. Instead, I walked down the street and had a beer at the bar
at the next Bal. The beer was not good and I had a worse cognac to take
the taste out of my mouth. When I came back to the Bal there was a crowd
on the floor and Georgette was dancing with the tall blond youth, who
danced big-hippily, carrying his head on one side, his eyes lifted as he
danced. As soon as the music stopped another one of them asked her to
dance. She had been taken up by them. I knew then that they would all
dance with her. They are like that.

I sat down at a table. Cohn was sitting there. Frances was dancing. Mrs.
Braddocks brought up somebody and introduced him as Robert Prentiss. He
was from New York by way of Chicago, and was a rising new novelist. He
had some sort of an English accent. I asked him to have a drink.

“Thanks so much,” he said, “I’ve just had one.”

“Have another.”

“Thanks, I will then.”

We got the daughter of the house over and each had a _fine à l’eau_.

“You’re from Kansas City, they tell me,” he said.

“Yes.”

“Do you find Paris amusing?”

“Yes.”

“Really?”

I was a little drunk. Not drunk in any positive sense but just enough to
be careless.

“For God’s sake,” I said, “yes. Don’t you?”

“Oh, how charmingly you get angry,” he said. “I wish I had that
faculty.”

I got up and walked over toward the dancing-floor. Mrs. Braddocks
followed me. “Don’t be cross with Robert,” she said. “He’s still only a
child, you know.”

“I wasn’t cross,” I said. “I just thought perhaps I was going to throw
up.”

“Your fiancée is having a great success,” Mrs. Braddocks looked out on
the floor where Georgette was dancing in the arms of the tall, dark one,
called Lett.

“Isn’t she?” I said.

“Rather,” said Mrs. Braddocks.

Cohn came up. “Come on, Jake,” he said, “have a drink.” We walked over
to the bar. “What’s the matter with you? You seem all worked up over
something?”

“Nothing. This whole show makes me sick is all.”

Brett came up to the bar.

“Hello, you chaps.”

“Hello, Brett,” I said. “Why aren’t you tight?”

“Never going to get tight any more. I say, give a chap a brandy and
soda.”

She stood holding the glass and I saw Robert Cohn looking at her. He
looked a great deal as his compatriot must have looked when he saw the
promised land. Cohn, of course, was much younger. But he had that look
of eager, deserving expectation.

Brett was damned good-looking. She wore a slipover jersey sweater and a
tweed skirt, and her hair was brushed back like a boy’s. She started all
that. She was built with curves like the hull of a racing yacht, and you
missed none of it with that wool jersey.

“It’s a fine crowd you’re with, Brett,” I said.

“Aren’t they lovely? And you, my dear. Where did you get it?”

“At the Napolitain.”

“And have you had a lovely evening?”

“Oh, priceless,” I said.

Brett laughed. “It’s wrong of you, Jake. It’s an insult to all of us.
Look at Frances there, and Jo.”

This for Cohn’s benefit.

“It’s in restraint of trade,” Brett said. She laughed again.

“You’re wonderfully sober,” I said.

“Yes. Aren’t I? And when one’s with the crowd I’m with, one can drink in
such safety, too.”

The music started and Robert Cohn said: “Will you dance this with me,
Lady Brett?”

Brett smiled at him. “I’ve promised to dance this with Jacob,” she
laughed. “You’ve a hell of a biblical name, Jake.”

“How about the next?” asked Cohn.

“We’re going,” Brett said. “We’ve a date up at Montmartre.” Dancing, I
looked over Brett’s shoulder and saw Cohn, standing at the bar, still
watching her.

“You’ve made a new one there,” I said to her.

“Don’t talk about it. Poor chap. I never knew it till just now.”

“Oh, well,” I said. “I suppose you like to add them up.”

“Don’t talk like a fool.”

“You do.”

“Oh, well. What if I do?”

“Nothing,” I said. We were dancing to the accordion and some one was
playing the banjo. It was hot and I felt happy. We passed close to
Georgette dancing with another one of them.

“What possessed you to bring her?”

“I don’t know, I just brought her.”

“You’re getting damned romantic.”

“No, bored.”

“Now?”

“No, not now.”

“Let’s get out of here. She’s well taken care of.”

“Do you want to?”

“Would I ask you if I didn’t want to?”

We left the floor and I took my coat off a hanger on the wall and put it
on. Brett stood by the bar. Cohn was talking to her. I stopped at the
bar and asked them for an envelope. The patronne found one. I took a
fifty-franc note from my pocket, put it in the envelope, sealed it, and
handed it to the patronne.

“If the girl I came with asks for me, will you give her this?” I said.
“If she goes out with one of those gentlemen, will you save this for
me?”

“C’est entendu, Monsieur,” the patronne said. “You go now? So early?”

“Yes,” I said.

We started out the door. Cohn was still talking to Brett. She said good
night and took my arm. “Good night, Cohn,” I said. Outside in the street
we looked for a taxi.

“You’re going to lose your fifty francs,” Brett said.

“Oh, yes.”

“No taxis.”

“We could walk up to the Pantheon and get one.”

“Come on and we’ll get a drink in the pub next door and send for one.”

“You wouldn’t walk across the street.”

“Not if I could help it.”

We went into the next bar and I sent a waiter for a taxi.

“Well,” I said, “we’re out away from them.”

We stood against the tall zinc bar and did not talk and looked at each
other. The waiter came and said the taxi was outside. Brett pressed my
hand hard. I gave the waiter a franc and we went out. “Where should I
tell him?” I asked.

“Oh, tell him to drive around.”

I told the driver to go to the Parc Montsouris, and got in, and slammed
the door. Brett was leaning back in the corner, her eyes closed. I got
in and sat beside her. The cab started with a jerk.

“Oh, darling, I’ve been so miserable,” Brett said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   4


The taxi went up the hill, passed the lighted square, then on into the
dark, still climbing, then levelled out onto a dark street behind St.
Etienne du Mont, went smoothly down the asphalt, passed the trees and
the standing bus at the Place de la Contrescarpe, then turned onto the
cobbles of the Rue Mouffetard. There were lighted bars and late open
shops on each side of the street. We were sitting apart and we jolted
close together going down the old street. Brett’s hat was off. Her head
was back. I saw her face in the lights from the open shops, then it was
dark, then I saw her face clearly as we came out on the Avenue des
Gobelins. The street was torn up and men were working on the car-tracks
by the light of acetylene flares. Brett’s face was white and the long
line of her neck showed in the bright light of the flares. The street
was dark again and I kissed her. Our lips were tight together and then
she turned away and pressed against the corner of the seat, as far away
as she could get. Her head was down.

“Don’t touch me,” she said. “Please don’t touch me.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I can’t stand it.”

“Oh, Brett.”

“You mustn’t. You must know. I can’t stand it, that’s all. Oh, darling,
please understand!”

“Don’t you love me?”

“Love you? I simply turn all to jelly when you touch me.”

“Isn’t there anything we can do about it?”

She was sitting up now. My arm was around her and she was leaning back
against me, and we were quite calm. She was looking into my eyes with
that way she had of looking that made you wonder whether she really saw
out of her own eyes. They would look on and on after every one else’s
eyes in the world would have stopped looking. She looked as though there
were nothing on earth she would not look at like that, and really she
was afraid of so many things.

“And there’s not a damn thing we could do,” I said.

“I don’t know,” she said. “I don’t want to go through that hell again.”

“We’d better keep away from each other.”

“But, darling, I have to see you. It isn’t all that you know.”

“No, but it always gets to be.”

“That’s my fault. Don’t we pay for all the things we do, though?”

She had been looking into my eyes all the time. Her eyes had different
depths, sometimes they seemed perfectly flat. Now you could see all the
way into them.

“When I think of the hell I’ve put chaps through. I’m paying for it all
now.”

“Don’t talk like a fool,” I said. “Besides, what happened to me is
supposed to be funny. I never think about it.”

“Oh, no. I’ll lay you don’t.”

“Well, let’s shut up about it.”

“I laughed about it too, myself, once.” She wasn’t looking at me. “A
friend of my brother’s came home that way from Mons. It seemed like a
hell of a joke. Chaps never know anything, do they?”

“No,” I said. “Nobody ever knows anything.”

I was pretty well through with the subject. At one time or another I had
probably considered it from most of its various angles, including the
one that certain injuries or imperfections are a subject of merriment
while remaining quite serious for the person possessing them.

“It’s funny,” I said. “It’s very funny. And it’s a lot of fun, too, to
be in love.”

“Do you think so?” her eyes looked flat again.

“I don’t mean fun that way. In a way it’s an enjoyable feeling.”

“No,” she said. “I think it’s hell on earth.”

“It’s good to see each other.”

“No. I don’t think it is.”

“Don’t you want to?”

“I have to.”

We were sitting now like two strangers. On the right was the Parc
Montsouris. The restaurant where they have the pool of live trout and
where you can sit and look out over the park was closed and dark. The
driver leaned his head around.

“Where do you want to go?” I asked. Brett turned her head away.

“Oh, go to the Select.”

“Café Select,” I told the driver. “Boulevard Montparnasse.” We drove
straight down, turning around the Lion de Belfort that guards the
passing Montrouge trams. Brett looked straight ahead. On the Boulevard
Raspail, with the lights of Montparnasse in sight, Brett said: “Would
you mind very much if I asked you to do something?”

“Don’t be silly.”

“Kiss me just once more before we get there.”

When the taxi stopped I got out and paid. Brett came out putting on her
hat. She gave me her hand as she stepped down. Her hand was shaky. “I
say, do I look too much of a mess?” She pulled her man’s felt hat down
and started in for the bar. Inside, against the bar and at tables, were
most of the crowd who a been at the dance.

“Hello, you chaps,” Brett said. “I’m going to have a drink.”

“Oh, Brett! Brett!” the little Greek portrait-painter, who called
himself a duke, and whom everybody called Zizi, pushed up to her. “I got
something fine to tell you.”

“Hello, Zizi,” Brett said.

“I want you to meet a friend,” Zizi said. A fat man came up.

“Count Mippipopolous, meet my friend Lady Ashley.”

“How do you do?” said Brett.

“Well, does your Ladyship have a good time here in Paris?” asked Count
Mippipopolous, who wore an elk’s tooth on his watch-chain.

“Rather,” said Brett.

“Paris is a fine town all right,” said the count. “But I guess you have
pretty big doings yourself over in London.”

“Oh, yes,” said Brett. “Enormous.”

Braddocks called to me from a table. “Barnes,” he said, “have a drink.
That girl of yours got in a frightful row.”

“What about?”

“Something the patronne’s daughter said. A corking row. She was rather
splendid, you know. Showed her yellow card and demanded the patronne’s
daughter’s too. I say it was a row.”

“What finally happened?”

“Oh, some one took her home. Not a bad-looking girl. Wonderful command
of the idiom. Do stay and have a drink.”

“No,” I said. “I must shove off. Seen Cohn?”

“He went home with Frances,” Mrs. Braddock put in.

“Poor chap, he looks awfully down,” Braddocks said.

“I dare say he is,” said Mrs. Braddocks.

“I have to shove off,” I said. “Good night.”

I said good night to Brett at the bar. The count was buying champagne.
“Will you take a glass of wine with us, sir?” he asked.

“No. Thanks awfully. I have to go.”

“Really going?” Brett asked.

“Yes,” I said. “I’ve got a rotten headache.”

“I’ll see you to-morrow?”

“Come in at the office.”

“Hardly.”

“Well, where will I see you?”

“Anywhere around five o’clock.”

“Make it the other side of town then.”

“Good. I’ll be at the Crillon at five.”

“Try and be there,” I said.

“Don’t worry,” Brett said. “I’ve never let you down, have I?”

“Heard from Mike?”

“Letter to-day.”

“Good night, sir,” said the count.

I went out onto the sidewalk and walked down toward the Boulevard St.
Michel, passed the tables of the Rotonde, still crowded, looked across
the street at the Dome, its tables running out to the edge of the
pavement. Some one waved at me from a table, I did not see who it was
and went on. I wanted to get home. The Boulevard Montparnasse was
deserted. Lavigne’s was closed tight, and they were stacking the tables
outside the Closerie des Lilas. I passed Ney’s statue standing among the
new-leaved chestnut-trees in the arc-light. There was a faded purple
wreath leaning against the base. I stopped and read the inscription:
from the Bonapartist Groups, some date; I forget. He looked very fine,
Marshal Ney in his top-boots, gesturing with his sword among the green
new horse-chestnut leaves. My flat was just across the street, a little
way down the Boulevard St. Michel.

There was a light in the concierge’s room and I knocked on the door and
she gave me my mail. I wished her good night and went up-stairs. There
were two letters and some papers. I looked at them under the gas-light
in the dining-room. The letters were from the States. One was a bank
statement. It showed a balance of $2432.60. I got out my check-book and
deducted four checks drawn since the first of the month, and discovered
I had a balance of $1832.60. I wrote this on the back of the statement.
The other letter was a wedding announcement. Mr. and Mrs. Aloysius Kirby
announce the marriage of their daughter Katherine—I knew neither the
girl nor the man she was marrying. They must be circularizing the town.
It was a funny name. I felt sure I could remember anybody with a name
like Aloysius. It was a good Catholic name. There was a crest on the
announcement. Like Zizi the Greek duke. And that count. The count was
funny. Brett had a title, too. Lady Ashley. To hell with Brett. To hell
with you, Lady Ashley.

I lit the lamp beside the bed, turned off the gas, and opened the wide
windows. The bed was far back from the windows, and I sat with the
windows open and undressed by the bed. Outside a night train, running on
the street-car tracks, went by carrying vegetables to the markets. They
were noisy at night when you could not sleep. Undressing, I looked at
myself in the mirror of the big armoire beside the bed. That was a
typically French way to furnish a room. Practical, too, I suppose. Of
all the ways to be wounded. I suppose it was funny. I put on my pajamas
and got into bed. I had the two bull-fight papers, and I took their
wrappers off. One was orange. The other yellow. They would both have the
same news, so whichever I read first would spoil the other. _Le Toril_
was the better paper, so I started to read it. I read it all the way
through, including the Petite Correspondance and the Cornigrams. I blew
out the lamp. Perhaps I would be able to sleep.

My head started to work. The old grievance. Well, it was a rotten way to
be wounded and flying on a joke front like the Italian. In the Italian
hospital we were going to form a society. It had a funny name in
Italian. I wonder what became of the others, the Italians. That was in
the Ospedale Maggiore in Milano, Padiglione Ponte. The next building was
the Padiglione Zonda. There was a statue of Ponte, or maybe it was
Zonda. That was where the liaison colonel came to visit me. That was
funny. That was about the first funny thing. I was all bandaged up. But
they had told him about it. Then he made that wonderful speech: “You, a
foreigner, an Englishman” (any foreigner was an Englishman) “have given
more than your life.” What a speech! I would like to have it illuminated
to hang in the office. He never laughed. He was putting himself in my
place, I guess. “Che mala fortuna! Che mala fortuna!”

I never used to realize it, I guess. I try and play it along and just
not make trouble for people. Probably I never would have had any trouble
if I hadn’t run into Brett when they shipped me to England. I suppose
she only wanted what she couldn’t have. Well, people were that way. To
hell with people. The Catholic Church had an awfully good way of
handling all that. Good advice, anyway. Not to think about it. Oh, it
was swell advice. Try and take it sometime. Try and take it.

I lay awake thinking and my mind jumping around. Then I couldn’t keep
away from it, and I started to think about Brett and all the rest of it
went away. I was thinking about Brett and my mind stopped jumping around
and started to go in sort of smooth waves. Then all of a sudden I
started to cry. Then after a while it was better and I lay in bed and
listened to the heavy trams go by and way down the street, and then I
went to sleep.

I woke up. There was a row going on outside. I listened and I thought I
recognized a voice. I put on a dressing-gown and went to the door. The
concierge was talking down-stairs. She was very angry. I heard my name
and called down the stairs.

“Is that you, Monsieur Barnes?” the concierge called.

“Yes. It’s me.”

“There’s a species of woman here who’s waked the whole street up. What
kind of a dirty business at this time of night! She says she must see
you. I’ve told her you’re asleep.”

Then I heard Brett’s voice. Half asleep I had been sure it was
Georgette. I don’t know why. She could not have known my address.

“Will you send her up, please?”

Brett came up the stairs. I saw she was quite drunk. “Silly thing to
do,” she said. “Make an awful row. I say, you weren’t asleep, were you?”

“What did you think I was doing?”

“Don’t know. What time is it?”

I looked at the clock. It was half-past four. “Had no idea what hour it
was,” Brett said. “I say, can a chap sit down? Don’t be cross, darling.
Just left the count. He brought me here.”

“What’s he like?” I was getting brandy and soda and glasses.

“Just a little,” said Brett. “Don’t try and make me drunk. The count?
Oh, rather. He’s quite one of us.”

“Is he a count?”

“Here’s how. I rather think so, you know. Deserves to be, anyhow. Knows
hell’s own amount about people. Don’t know where he got it all. Owns a
chain of sweetshops in the States.”

She sipped at her glass.

“Think he called it a chain. Something like that. Linked them all up.
Told me a little about it. Damned interesting. He’s one of us, though.
Oh, quite. No doubt. One can always tell.”

She took another drink.

“How do I buck on about all this? You don’t mind, do you? He’s putting
up for Zizi, you know.”

“Is Zizi really a duke, too?”

“I shouldn’t wonder. Greek, you know. Rotten painter. I rather liked the
count.”

“Where did you go with him?”

“Oh, everywhere. He just brought me here now. Offered me ten thousand
dollars to go to Biarritz with him. How much is that in pounds?”

“Around two thousand.”

“Lot of money. I told him I couldn’t do it. He was awfully nice about
it. Told him I knew too many people in Biarritz.”

Brett laughed.

“I say, you are slow on the up-take,” she said. I had only sipped my
brandy and soda. I took a long drink.

“That’s better. Very funny,” Brett said. “Then he wanted me to go to
Cannes with him. Told him I knew too many people in Cannes. Monte Carlo.
Told him I knew too many people in Monte Carlo. Told him I knew too many
people everywhere. Quite true, too. So I asked him to bring me here.”

She looked at me, her hand on the table, her glass raised. “Don’t look
like that,” she said. “Told him I was in love with you. True, too. Don’t
look like that. He was damn nice about it. Wants to drive us out to
dinner to-morrow night. Like to go?”

“Why not?”

“I’d better go now.”

“Why?”

“Just wanted to see you. Damned silly idea. Want to get dressed and come
down? He’s got the car just up the street.”

“The count?”

“Himself. And a chauffeur in livery. Going to drive me around and have
breakfast in the Bois. Hampers. Got it all at Zelli’s. Dozen bottles of
Mumms. Tempt you?”

“I have to work in the morning,” I said. “I’m too far behind you now to
catch up and be any fun.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“Can’t do it.”

“Right. Send him a tender message?”

“Anything. Absolutely.”

“Good night, darling.”

“Don’t be sentimental.”

“You make me ill.”

We kissed good night and Brett shivered. “I’d better go,” she said.
“Good night, darling.”

“You don’t have to go.”

“Yes.”

We kissed again on the stairs and as I called for the cordon the
concierge muttered something behind her door. I went back up-stairs and
from the open window watched Brett walking up the street to the big
limousine drawn up to the curb under the arc-light. She got in and it
started off. I turned around. On the table was an empty glass and a
glass half-full of brandy and soda. I took them both out to the kitchen
and poured the half-full glass down the sink. I turned off the gas in
the dining-room, kicked off my slippers sitting on the bed, and got into
bed. This was Brett, that I had felt like crying about. Then I thought
of her walking up the street and stepping into the car, as I had last
seen her, and of course in a little while I felt like hell again. It is
awfully easy to be hard-boiled about everything in the daytime, but at
night it is another thing.




                                CHAPTER
                                   5


In the morning I walked down the Boulevard to the rue Soufflot for
coffee and brioche. It was a fine morning. The horse-chestnut trees in
the Luxembourg gardens were in bloom. There was the pleasant
early-morning feeling of a hot day. I read the papers with the coffee
and then smoked a cigarette. The flower-women were coming up from the
market and arranging their daily stock. Students went by going up to the
law school, or down to the Sorbonne. The Boulevard was busy with trams
and people going to work. I got on an S bus and rode down to the
Madeleine, standing on the back platform. From the Madeleine I walked
along the Boulevard des Capucines to the Opéra, and up to my office. I
passed the man with the jumping frogs and the man with the boxer toys. I
stepped aside to avoid walking into the thread with which his girl
assistant manipulated the boxers. She was standing looking away, the
thread in her folded hands. The man was urging two tourists to buy.
Three more tourists had stopped and were watching. I walked on behind a
man who was pushing a roller that printed the name CINZANO on the
sidewalk in damp letters. All along people were going to work. It felt
pleasant to be going to work. I walked across the avenue and turned in
to my office.

Up-stairs in the office I read the French morning papers, smoked, and
then sat at the typewriter and got off a good morning’s work. At eleven
o’clock I went over to the Quai d’Orsay in a taxi and went in and sat
with about a dozen correspondents, while the foreign-office mouthpiece,
a young Nouvelle Revue Française diplomat in horn-rimmed spectacles,
talked and answered questions for half an hour. The President of the
Council was in Lyons making a speech, or, rather he was on his way back.
Several people asked questions to hear themselves talk and there were a
couple of questions asked by news service men who wanted to know the
answers. There was no news. I shared a taxi back from the Quai d’Orsay
with Woolsey and Krum.

“What do you do nights, Jake?” asked Krum. “I never see you around.”

“Oh, I’m over in the Quarter.”

“I’m coming over some night. The Dingo. That’s the great place, isn’t
it?”

“Yes. That, or this new dive, The Select.”

“I’ve meant to get over,” said Krum. “You know how it is, though, with a
wife and kids.”

“Playing any tennis?” Woolsey asked.

“Well, no,” said Krum. “I can’t say I’ve played any this year. I’ve
tried to get away, but Sundays it’s always rained, and the courts are so
damned crowded.”

“The Englishmen all have Saturday off,” Woolsey said.

“Lucky beggars,” said Krum. “Well, I’ll tell you. Some day I’m not going
to be working for an agency. Then I’ll have plenty of time to get out in
the country.”

“That’s the thing to do. Live out in the country and have a little car.”

“I’ve been thinking some about getting a car next year.”

I banged on the glass. The chauffeur stopped. “Here’s my street,” I
said. “Come in and have a drink.”

“Thanks, old man,” Krum said. Woolsey shook his head. “I’ve got to file
that line he got off this morning.”

I put a two-franc piece in Krum’s hand.

“You’re crazy, Jake,” he said. “This is on me.”

“It’s all on the office, anyway.”

“Nope. I want to get it.”

I waved good-by. Krum put his head out. “See you at the lunch on
Wednesday.”

“You bet.”

I went to the office in the elevator. Robert Cohn was waiting for me.
“Hello, Jake,” he said. “Going out to lunch?”

“Yes. Let me see if there is anything new.”

“Where will we eat?”

“Anywhere.”

I was looking over my desk. “Where do you want to eat?”

“How about Wetzel’s? They’ve got good hors d’œuvres.”

In the restaurant we ordered hors d’œuvres and beer. The sommelier
brought the beer, tall, beaded on the outside of the steins, and cold.
There were a dozen different dishes of hors d’œuvres.

“Have any fun last night?” I asked.

“No. I don’t think so.”

“How’s the writing going?”

“Rotten. I can’t get this second book going.”

“That happens to everybody.”

“Oh, I’m sure of that. It gets me worried, though.”

“Thought any more about going to South America?”

“I mean that.”

“Well, why don’t you start off?”

“Frances.”

“Well,” I said, “take her with you.”

“She wouldn’t like it. That isn’t the sort of thing she likes. She likes
a lot of people around.”

“Tell her to go to hell.”

“I can’t. I’ve got certain obligations to her.”

He shoved the sliced cucumbers away and took a pickled herring.

“What do you know about Lady Brett Ashley, Jake?”

“Her name’s Lady Ashley. Brett’s her own name. She’s a nice girl,” I
said. “She’s getting a divorce and she’s going to marry Mike Campbell.
He’s over in Scotland now. Why?”

“She’s a remarkably attractive woman.”

“Isn’t she?”

“There’s a certain quality about her, a certain fineness. She seems to
be absolutely fine and straight.”

“She’s very nice.”

“I don’t know how to describe the quality,” Cohn said. “I suppose it’s
breeding.”

“You sound as though you liked her pretty well.”

“I do. I shouldn’t wonder if I were in love with her.”

“She’s a drunk,” I said. “She’s in love with Mike Campbell, and she’s
going to marry him. He’s going to be rich as hell some day.”

“I don’t believe she’ll ever marry him.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t know. I just don’t believe it. Have you known her a long time?”

“Yes,” I said. “She was a V. A. D. in a hospital I was in during the
war.”

“She must have been just a kid then.”

“She’s thirty-four now.”

“When did she marry Ashley?”

“During the war. Her own true love had just kicked off with the
dysentery.”

“You talk sort of bitter.”

“Sorry. I didn’t mean to. I was just trying to give you the facts.”

“I don’t believe she would marry anybody she didn’t love.”

“Well,” I said. “She’s done it twice.”

“I don’t believe it.”

“Well,” I said, “don’t ask me a lot of fool questions if you don’t like
the answers.”

“I didn’t ask you that.”

“You asked me what I knew about Brett Ashley.”

“I didn’t ask you to insult her.”

“Oh, go to hell.”

He stood up from the table his face white, and stood there white and
angry behind the little plates of hors d’œuvres.

“Sit down,” I said. “Don’t be a fool.”

“You’ve got to take that back.”

“Oh, cut out the prep-school stuff.”

“Take it back.”

“Sure. Anything. I never heard of Brett Ashley. How’s that?

“No. Not that. About me going to hell.”

“Oh, don’t go to hell,” I said. “Stick around. We’re just starting
lunch.”

Cohn smiled again and sat down. He seemed glad to sit down. What the
hell would he have done if he hadn’t sat down? “You say such damned
insulting things, Jake.”

“I’m sorry. I’ve got a nasty tongue. I never mean it when I say nasty
things.”

“I know it,” Cohn said. “You’re really about the best friend I have,
Jake.”

God help you, I thought. “Forget what I said,” I said out loud. “I’m
sorry.”

“It’s all right. It’s fine. I was just sore for a minute.”

“Good. Let’s get something else to eat.”

After we finished the lunch we walked up to the Café de la Paix and had
coffee. I could feel Cohn wanted to bring up Brett again, but I held him
off it. We talked about one thing and another, and I left him to come to
the office.




                                CHAPTER
                                   6


At five o’clock I was in the Hotel Crillon waiting for Brett. She was
not there, so I sat down and wrote some letters. They were not very good
letters but I hoped their being on Crillon stationery would help them.
Brett did not turn up, so about quarter to six I went down to the bar
and had a Jack Rose with George the barman. Brett had not been in the
bar either, and so I looked for her up-stairs on my way out, and took a
taxi to the Café Select. Crossing the Seine I saw a string of barges
being towed empty down the current, riding high, the bargemen at the
sweeps as they came toward the bridge. The river looked nice. It was
always pleasant crossing bridges in Paris.

The taxi rounded the statue of the inventor of the semaphore engaged in
doing same, and turned up the Boulevard Raspail, and I sat back to let
that part of the ride pass. The Boulevard Raspail always made dull
riding. It was like a certain stretch on the P. L. M. between
Fontainebleau and Montereau that always made me feel bored and dead and
dull until it was over. I suppose it is some association of ideas that
makes those dead places in a journey. There are other streets in Paris
as ugly as the Boulevard Raspail. It is a street I do not mind walking
down at all. But I cannot stand to ride along it. Perhaps I had read
something about it once. That was the way Robert Cohn was about all of
Paris. I wondered where Cohn got that incapacity to enjoy Paris.
Possibly from Mencken. Mencken hates Paris, I believe. So many young men
get their likes and dislikes from Mencken.

The taxi stopped in front of the Rotonde. No matter what café in
Montparnasse you ask a taxi-driver to bring you to from the right bank
of the river, they always take you to the Rotonde. Ten years from now it
will probably be the Dome. It was near enough, anyway. I walked past the
sad tables of the Rotonde to the Select. There were a few people inside
at the bar, and outside, alone, sat Harvey Stone. He had a pile of
saucers in front of him, and he needed a shave.

“Sit down,” said Harvey, “I’ve been looking for you.”

“What’s the matter?”

“Nothing. Just looking for you.”

“Been out to the races?”

“No. Not since Sunday.”

“What do you hear from the States?”

“Nothing. Absolutely nothing.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know. I’m through with them. I’m absolutely through with them.”

He leaned forward and looked me in the eye.

“Do you want to know something, Jake?”

“Yes.”

“I haven’t had anything to eat for five days.”

I figured rapidly back in my mind. It was three days ago that Harvey had
won two hundred francs from me shaking poker dice in the New York Bar.

“What’s the matter?”

“No money. Money hasn’t come,” he paused. “I tell you it’s strange,
Jake. When I’m like this I just want to be alone. I want to stay in my
own room. I’m like a cat.”

I felt in my pocket.

“Would a hundred help you any, Harvey?”

“Yes.”

“Come on. Let’s go and eat.”

“There’s no hurry. Have a drink.”

“Better eat.”

“No. When I get like this I don’t care whether I eat or not.”

We had a drink. Harvey added my saucer to his own pile.

“Do you know Mencken, Harvey?”

“Yes. Why?”

“What’s he like?”

“He’s all right. He says some pretty funny things. Last time I had
dinner with him we talked about Hoffenheimer. ‘The trouble is,’ he said,
‘he’s a garter snapper.’ That’s not bad.”

“That’s not bad.”

“He’s through now,” Harvey went on. “He’s written about all the things
he knows, and now he’s on all the things he doesn’t know.”

“I guess he’s all right,” I said. “I just can’t read him.”

“Oh, nobody reads him now,” Harvey said, “except the people that used to
read the Alexander Hamilton Institute.”

“Well,” I said. “That was a good thing, too.”

“Sure,” said Harvey. So we sat and thought deeply for a while.

“Have another port?”

“All right,” said Harvey.

“There comes Cohn,” I said. Robert Cohn was crossing the street.

“That moron,” said Harvey. Cohn came up to our table.

“Hello, you bums,” he said.

“Hello, Robert,” Harvey said. “I was just telling Jake here that you’re
a moron.”

“What do you mean?”

“Tell us right off. Don’t think. What would you rather do if you could
do anything you wanted?”

Cohn started to consider.

“Don’t think. Bring it right out.”

“I don’t know,” Cohn said. “What’s it all about, anyway?”

“I mean what would you rather do. What comes into your head first. No
matter how silly it is.”

“I don’t know,” Cohn said. “I think I’d rather play football again with
what I know about handling myself, now.”

“I misjudged you,” Harvey said. “You’re not a moron. You’re only a case
of arrested development.”

“You’re awfully funny, Harvey,” Cohn said. “Some day somebody will push
your face in.”

Harvey Stone laughed. “You think so. They won’t, though. Because it
wouldn’t make any difference to me. I’m not a fighter.”

“It would make a difference to you if anybody did it.”

“No, it wouldn’t. That’s where you make your big mistake. Because you’re
not intelligent.”

“Cut it out about me.”

“Sure,” said Harvey. “It doesn’t make any difference to me. You don’t
mean anything to me.”

“Come on, Harvey,” I said. “Have another porto.”

“No,” he said. “I’m going up the street and eat. See you later, Jake.”

He walked out and up the street. I watched him crossing the street
through the taxis, small, heavy, slowly sure of himself in the traffic.

“He always gets me sore,” Cohn said. “I can’t stand him.”

“I like him,” I said. “I’m fond of him. You don’t want to get sore at
him.”

“I know it,” Cohn said. “He just gets on my nerves.”

“Write this afternoon?”

“No. I couldn’t get it going. It’s harder to do than my first book. I’m
having a hard time handling it.”

The sort of healthy conceit that he had when he returned from America
early in the spring was gone. Then he had been sure of his work, only
with these personal longings for adventure. Now the sureness was gone.
Somehow I feel I have not shown Robert Cohn clearly. The reason is that
until he fell in love with Brett, I never heard him make one remark that
would, in any way, detach him from other people. He was nice to watch on
the tennis-court, he had a good body, and he kept it in shape; he
handled his cards well at bridge, and he had a funny sort of
undergraduate quality about him. If he were in a crowd nothing he said
stood out. He wore what used to be called polo shirts at school, and may
be called that still, but he was not professionally youthful. I do not
believe he thought about his clothes much. Externally he had been formed
at Princeton. Internally he had been moulded by the two women who had
trained him. He had a nice, boyish sort of cheerfulness that had never
been trained out of him, and I probably have not brought it out. He
loved to win at tennis. He probably loved to win as much as Lenglen, for
instance. On the other hand, he was not angry at being beaten. When he
fell in love with Brett his tennis game went all to pieces. People beat
him who had never had a chance with him. He was very nice about it.

Anyhow, we were sitting on the terrace of the Café Select, and Harvey
Stone had just crossed the street.

“Come on up to the Lilas,” I said.

“I have a date.”

“What time?”

“Frances is coming here at seven-fifteen.”

“There she is.”

Frances Clyne was coming toward us from across the street. She was a
very tall girl who walked with a great deal of movement. She waved and
smiled. We watched her cross the street.

“Hello,” she said, “I’m so glad you’re here, Jake. I’ve been wanting to
talk to you.”

“Hello, Frances,” said Cohn. He smiled.

“Why, hello, Robert. Are you here?” She went on, talking rapidly. “I’ve
had the darndest time. This one”—shaking her head at Cohn—“didn’t come
home for lunch.”

“I wasn’t supposed to.”

“Oh, I know. But you didn’t say anything about it to the cook. Then I
had a date myself, and Paula wasn’t at her office. I went to the Ritz
and waited for her, and she never came, and of course I didn’t have
enough money to lunch at the Ritz——”

“What did you do?”

“Oh, went out, of course.” She spoke in a sort of imitation joyful
manner. “I always keep my appointments. No one keeps theirs, nowadays. I
ought to know better. How are you, Jake, anyway?”

“Fine.”

“That was a fine girl you had at the dance, and then went off with that
Brett one.”

“Don’t you like her?” Cohn asked.

“I think she’s perfectly charming. Don’t you?”

Cohn said nothing.

“Look, Jake. I want to talk with you. Would you come over with me to the
Dome? You’ll stay here, won’t you, Robert? Come on, Jake.”

We crossed the Boulevard Montparnasse and sat down at a table. A boy
came up with the _Paris Times_, and I bought one and opened it.

“What’s the matter, Frances?”

“Oh, nothing,” she said, “except that he wants to leave me.”

“How do you mean?”

“Oh, he told every one that we were going to be married, and I told my
mother and every one, and now he doesn’t want to do it.”

“What’s the matter?”

“He’s decided he hasn’t lived enough. I knew it would happen when he
went to New York.”

She looked up, very bright-eyed and trying to talk inconsequentially.

“I wouldn’t marry him if he doesn’t want to. Of course I wouldn’t. I
wouldn’t marry him now for anything. But it does seem to me to be a
little late now, after we’ve waited three years, and I’ve just gotten my
divorce.”

I said nothing.

“We were going to celebrate so, and instead we’ve just had scenes. It’s
so childish. We have dreadful scenes, and he cries and begs me to be
reasonable, but he says he just can’t do it.”

“It’s rotten luck.”

“I should say it is rotten luck. I’ve wasted two years and a half on him
now. And I don’t know now if any man will ever want to marry me. Two
years ago I could have married anybody I wanted, down at Cannes. All the
old ones that wanted to marry somebody chic and settle down were crazy
about me. Now I don’t think I could get anybody.”

“Sure, you could marry anybody.”

“No, I don’t believe it. And I’m fond of him, too. And I’d like to have
children. I always thought we’d have children.”

She looked at me very brightly. “I never liked children much, but I
don’t want to think I’ll never have them. I always thought I’d have them
and then like them.”

“He’s got children.”

“Oh, yes. He’s got children, and he’s got money, and he’s got a rich
mother, and he’s written a book, and nobody will publish my stuff;
nobody at all. It isn’t bad, either. And I haven’t got any money at all.
I could have had alimony, but I got the divorce the quickest way.”

She looked at me again very brightly.

“It isn’t right. It’s my own fault and it’s not, too. I ought to have
known better. And when I tell him he just cries and says he can’t marry.
Why can’t he marry? I’d be a good wife. I’m easy to get along with. I
leave him alone. It doesn’t do any good.”

“It’s a rotten shame.”

“Yes, it is a rotten shame. But there’s no use talking about it, is
there? Come on, let’s go back to the café.”

“And of course there isn’t anything I can do.”

“No. Just don’t let him know I talked to you. I know what he wants.” Now
for the first time she dropped her bright, terribly cheerful manner. “He
wants to go back to New York alone, and be there when his book comes out
so when a lot of little chickens like it. That’s what he wants.”

“Maybe they won’t like it. I don’t think he’s that way. Really.”

“You don’t know him like I do, Jake. That’s what he wants to do. I know
it. I know it. That’s why he doesn’t want to marry. He wants to have a
big triumph this fall all by himself.”

“Want to go back to the café?”

“Yes. Come on.”

We got up from the table—they had never brought us a drink—and started
across the street toward the Select, where Cohn sat smiling at us from
behind the marble-topped table.

“Well, what are you smiling at?” Frances asked him. “Feel pretty happy?”

“I was smiling at you and Jake with your secrets.”

“Oh, what I’ve told Jake isn’t any secret. Everybody will know it soon
enough. I only wanted to give Jake a decent version.”

“What was it? About your going to England?”

“Yes, about my going to England. Oh, Jake! I forgot to tell you. I’m
going to England.”

“Isn’t that fine!”

“Yes, that’s the way it’s done in the very best families. Robert’s
sending me. He’s going to give me two hundred pounds and then I’m going
to visit friends. Won’t it be lovely? The friends don’t know about it,
yet.”

She turned to Cohn and smiled at him. He was not smiling now.

“You were only going to give me a hundred pounds, weren’t you, Robert?
But I made him give me two hundred. He’s really very generous. Aren’t
you, Robert?”

I do not know how people could say such terrible things to Robert Cohn.
There are people to whom you could not say insulting things. They give
you a feeling that the world would be destroyed, would actually be
destroyed before your eyes, if you said certain things. But here was
Cohn taking it all. Here it was, all going on right before me, and I did
not even feel an impulse to try and stop it. And this was friendly
joking to what went on later.

“How can you say such things, Frances?” Cohn interrupted.

“Listen to him. I’m going to England. I’m going to visit friends. Ever
visit friends that didn’t want you? Oh, they’ll have to take me, all
right. ‘How do you do, my dear? Such a long time since we’ve seen you.
And how is your dear mother?’ Yes, how is my dear mother? She put all
her money into French war bonds. Yes, she did. Probably the only person
in the world that did. ‘And what about Robert?’ or else very careful
talking around Robert. ‘You must be most careful not to mention him, my
dear. Poor Frances has had a most unfortunate experience.’ Won’t it be
fun, Robert? Don’t you think it will be fun, Jake?”

She turned to me with that terribly bright smile. It was very
satisfactory to her to have an audience for this.

“And where are you going to be, Robert? It’s my own fault, all right.
Perfectly my own fault. When I made you get rid of your little secretary
on the magazine I ought to have known you’d get rid of me the same way.
Jake doesn’t know about that. Should I tell him?”

“Shut up, Frances, for God’s sake.”

“Yes, I’ll tell him. Robert had a little secretary on the magazine. Just
the sweetest little thing in the world, and he thought she was
wonderful, and then I came along and he thought I was pretty wonderful,
too. So I made him get rid of her, and he had brought her to
Provincetown from Carmel when he moved the magazine, and he didn’t even
pay her fare back to the coast. All to please me. He thought I was
pretty fine, then. Didn’t you, Robert?

“You mustn’t misunderstand, Jake, it was absolutely platonic with the
secretary. Not even platonic. Nothing at all, really. It was just that
she was so nice. And he did that just to please me. Well, I suppose that
we that live by the sword shall perish by the sword. Isn’t that
literary, though? You want to remember that for your next book, Robert.

“You know Robert is going to get material for a new book. Aren’t you,
Robert? That’s why he’s leaving me. He’s decided I don’t film well. You
see, he was so busy all the time that we were living together, writing
on this book, that he doesn’t remember anything about us. So now he’s
going out and get some new material. Well, I hope he gets something
frightfully interesting.

“Listen, Robert, dear. Let me tell you something. You won’t mind, will
you? Don’t have scenes with your young ladies. Try not to. Because you
can’t have scenes without crying, and then you pity yourself so much you
can’t remember what the other person’s said. You’ll never be able to
remember any conversations that way. Just try and be calm. I know it’s
awfully hard. But remember, it’s for literature. We all ought to make
sacrifices for literature. Look at me. I’m going to England without a
protest. All for literature. We must all help young writers. Don’t you
think so, Jake? But you’re not a young writer. Are you, Robert? You’re
thirty-four. Still, I suppose that is young for a great writer. Look at
Hardy. Look at Anatole France. He just died a little while ago. Robert
doesn’t think he’s any good, though. Some of his French friends told
him. He doesn’t read French very well himself. He wasn’t a good writer
like you are, was he, Robert? Do you think he ever had to go and look
for material? What do you suppose he said to his mistresses when he
wouldn’t marry them? I wonder if he cried, too? Oh, I’ve just thought of
something.” She put her gloved hand up to her lips. “I know the real
reason why Robert won’t marry me, Jake. It’s just come to me. They’ve
sent it to me in a vision in the Café Select. Isn’t it mystic? Some day
they’ll put a tablet up. Like at Lourdes. Do you want to hear, Robert?
I’ll tell you. It’s so simple. I wonder why I never thought about it.
Why, you see, Robert’s always wanted to have a mistress, and if he
doesn’t marry me, why, then he’s had one. She was his mistress for over
two years. See how it is? And if he marries me, like he’s always
promised he would, that would be the end of all the romance. Don’t you
think that’s bright of me to figure that out? It’s true, too. Look at
him and see if it’s not. Where are you going, Jake?”

“I’ve got to go in and see Harvey Stone a minute.”

Cohn looked up as I went in. His face was white. Why did he sit there?
Why did he keep on taking it like that?

As I stood against the bar looking out I could see them through the
window. Frances was talking on to him, smiling brightly, looking into
his face each time she asked: “Isn’t it so, Robert?” Or maybe she did
not ask that now. Perhaps she said something else. I told the barman I
did not want anything to drink and went out through the side door. As I
went out the door I looked back through the two thicknesses of glass and
saw them sitting there. She was still talking to him. I went down a side
street to the Boulevard Raspail. A taxi came along and I got in and gave
the driver the address of my flat.




                                CHAPTER
                                   7


As I started up the stairs the concierge knocked on the glass of the
door of her lodge, and as I stopped she came out. She had some letters
and a telegram.

“Here is the post. And there was a lady here to see you.”

“Did she leave a card?”

“No. She was with a gentleman. It was the one who was here last night.
In the end I find she is very nice.”

“Was she with a friend of mine?”

“I don’t know. He was never here before. He was very large. Very, very
large. She was very nice. Very, very nice. Last night she was, perhaps,
a little—” She put her head on one hand and rocked it up and down.
“I’ll speak perfectly frankly, Monsieur Barnes. Last night I found her
not so gentille. Last night I formed another idea of her. But listen to
what I tell you. She is très, très gentille. She is of very good family.
It is a thing you can see.”

“They did not leave any word?”

“Yes. They said they would be back in an hour.”

“Send them up when they come.”

“Yes, Monsieur Barnes. And that lady, that lady there is some one. An
eccentric, perhaps, but quelqu’une, quelqu’une!”

The concierge, before she became a concierge, had owned a drink-selling
concession at the Paris race-courses. Her life-work lay in the pelouse,
but she kept an eye on the people of the pesage, and she took great
pride in telling me which of my guests were well brought up, which were
of good family, who were sportsmen, a French word pronounced with the
accent on the men. The only trouble was that people who did not fall
into any of those three categories were very liable to be told there was
no one home, chez Barnes. One of my friends, an extremely
underfed-looking painter, who was obviously to Madame Duzinell neither
well brought up, of good family, nor a sportsman, wrote me a letter
asking if I could get him a pass to get by the concierge so he could
come up and see me occasionally in the evenings.

I went up to the flat wondering what Brett had done to the concierge.
The wire was a cable from Bill Gorton, saying he was arriving on the
_France_. I put the mail on the table, went back to the bedroom,
undressed and had a shower. I was rubbing down when I heard the
door-bell pull. I put on a bathrobe and slippers and went to the door.
It was Brett. Back of her was the count. He was holding a great bunch of
roses.

“Hello, darling,” said Brett. “Aren’t you going to let us in?”

“Come on. I was just bathing.”

“Aren’t you the fortunate man. Bathing.”

“Only a shower. Sit down, Count Mippipopolous. What will you drink?”

“I don’t know whether you like flowers, sir,” the count said, “but I
took the liberty of just bringing these roses.”

“Here, give them to me.” Brett took them. “Get me some water in this,
Jake.” I filled the big earthenware jug with water in the kitchen, and
Brett put the roses in it, and placed them in the centre of the
dining-room table.

“I say. We have had a day.”

“You don’t remember anything about a date with me at the Crillon?”

“No. Did we have one? I must have been blind.”

“You were quite drunk, my dear,” said the count.

“Wasn’t I, though? And the count’s been a brick, absolutely.”

“You’ve got hell’s own drag with the concierge now.”

“I ought to have. Gave her two hundred francs.”

“Don’t be a damned fool.”

“His,” she said, and nodded at the count.

“I thought we ought to give her a little something for last night. It
was very late.”

“He’s wonderful,” Brett said. “He remembers everything that’s happened.”

“So do you, my dear.”

“Fancy,” said Brett. “Who’d want to? I say, Jake, _do_ we get a drink?”

“You get it while I go in and dress. You know where it is.”

“Rather.”

While I dressed I heard Brett put down glasses and then a siphon, and
then heard them talking. I dressed slowly, sitting on the bed. I felt
tired and pretty rotten. Brett came in the room, a glass in her hand,
and sat on the bed.

“What’s the matter, darling? Do you feel rocky?”

She kissed me coolly on the forehead.

“Oh, Brett, I love you so much.”

“Darling,” she said. Then: “Do you want me to send him away?”

“No. He’s nice.”

“I’ll send him away.”

“No, don’t.”

“Yes, I’ll send him away.”

“You can’t just like that.”

“Can’t I, though? You stay here. He’s mad about me, I tell you.”

She was gone out of the room. I lay face down on the bed. I was having a
bad time. I heard them talking but I did not listen. Brett came in and
sat on the bed.

“Poor old darling.” She stroked my head.

“What did you say to him?” I was lying with my face away from her. I did
not want to see her.

“Sent him for champagne. He loves to go for champagne.”

Then later: “Do you feel better, darling? Is the head any better?”

“It’s better.”

“Lie quiet. He’s gone to the other side of town.”

“Couldn’t we live together, Brett? Couldn’t we just live together?”

“I don’t think so. I’d just _tromper_ you with everybody. You couldn’t
stand it.”

“I stand it now.”

“That would be different. It’s my fault, Jake. It’s the way I’m made.”

“Couldn’t we go off in the country for a while?”

“It wouldn’t be any good. I’ll go if you like. But I couldn’t live
quietly in the country. Not with my own true love.”

“I know.”

“Isn’t it rotten? There isn’t any use my telling you I love you.”

“You know I love you.”

“Let’s not talk. Talking’s all bilge. I’m going away from you, and then
Michael’s coming back.”

“Why are you going away?”

“Better for you. Better for me.”

“When are you going?”

“Soon as I can.”

“Where?”

“San Sebastian.”

“Can’t we go together?”

“No. That would be a hell of an idea after we’d just talked it out.”

“We never agreed.”

“Oh, you know as well as I do. Don’t be obstinate, darling.”

“Oh, sure,” I said. “I know you’re right. I’m just low, and when I’m low
I talk like a fool.”

I sat up, leaned over, found my shoes beside the bed and put them on. I
stood up.

“Don’t look like that, darling.”

“How do you want me to look?”

“Oh, don’t be a fool. I’m going away to-morrow.”

“To-morrow?”

“Yes. Didn’t I say so? I am.”

“Let’s have a drink, then. The count will be back.”

“Yes. He should be back. You know he’s extraordinary about buying
champagne. It means any amount to him.”

We went into the dining-room. I took up the brandy bottle and poured
Brett a drink and one for myself. There was a ring at the bell-pull. I
went to the door and there was the count. Behind him was the chauffeur
carrying a basket of champagne.

“Where should I have him put it, sir?” asked the count.

“In the kitchen,” Brett said.

“Put it in there, Henry,” the count motioned. “Now go down and get the
ice.” He stood looking after the basket inside the kitchen door. “I
think you’ll find that’s very good wine,” he said. “I know we don’t get
much of a chance to judge good wine in the States now, but I got this
from a friend of mine that’s in the business.”

“Oh, you always have some one in the trade,” Brett said.

“This fellow raises the grapes. He’s got thousands of acres of them.”

“What’s his name?” asked Brett. “Veuve Cliquot?”

“No,” said the count. “Mumms. He’s a baron.”

“Isn’t it wonderful,” said Brett. “We all have titles. Why haven’t you a
title, Jake?”

“I assure you, sir,” the count put his hand on my arm. “It never does a
man any good. Most of the time it costs you money.”

“Oh, I don’t know. It’s damned useful sometimes,” Brett said.

“I’ve never known it to do me any good.”

“You haven’t used it properly. I’ve had hell’s own amount of credit on
mine.”

“Do sit down, count,” I said. “Let me take that stick.”

The count was looking at Brett across the table under the gas-light. She
was smoking a cigarette and flicking the ashes on the rug. She saw me
notice it. “I say, Jake, I don’t want to ruin your rugs. Can’t you give
a chap an ash-tray?”

I found some ash-trays and spread them around. The chauffeur came up
with a bucket full of salted ice. “Put two bottles in it, Henry,” the
count called.

“Anything else, sir?”

“No. Wait down in the car.” He turned to Brett and to me. “We’ll want to
ride out to the Bois for dinner?”

“If you like,” Brett said. “I couldn’t eat a thing.”

“I always like a good meal,” said the count.

“Should I bring the wine in, sir?” asked the chauffeur.

“Yes. Bring it in, Henry,” said the count. He took out a heavy pigskin
cigar-case and offered it to me. “Like to try a real American cigar?”

“Thanks,” I said. “I’ll finish the cigarette.”

He cut off the end of his cigar with a gold cutter he wore on one end of
his watch-chain.

“I like a cigar to really draw,” said the count “Half the cigars you
smoke don’t draw.”

He lit the cigar, puffed at it, looking across the table at Brett. “And
when you’re divorced, Lady Ashley, then you won’t have a title.”

“No. What a pity.”

“No,” said the count. “You don’t need a title. You got class all over
you.”

“Thanks. Awfully decent of you.”

“I’m not joking you,” the count blew a cloud of smoke. “You got the most
class of anybody I ever seen. You got it. That’s all.”

“Nice of you,” said Brett. “Mummy would be pleased. Couldn’t you write
it out, and I’ll send it in a letter to her.”

“I’d tell her, too,” said the count. “I’m not joking you. I never joke
people. Joke people and you make enemies. That’s what I always say.”

“You’re right,” Brett said. “You’re terribly right. I always joke people
and I haven’t a friend in the world. Except Jake here.”

“You don’t joke him.”

“That’s it.”

“Do you, now?” asked the count. “Do you joke him?”

Brett looked at me and wrinkled up the corners of her eyes.

“No,” she said. “I wouldn’t joke him.”

“See,” said the count. “You don’t joke him.”

“This is a hell of a dull talk,” Brett said. “How about some of that
champagne?”

The count reached down and twirled the bottles in the shiny bucket. “It
isn’t cold, yet. You’re always drinking, my dear. Why don’t you just
talk?”

“I’ve talked too ruddy much. I’ve talked myself all out to Jake.”

“I should like to hear you really talk, my dear. When you talk to me you
never finish your sentences at all.”

“Leave ’em for you to finish. Let any one finish them as they like.”

“It is a very interesting system,” the count reached down and gave the
bottles a twirl. “Still I would like to hear you talk some time.”

“Isn’t he a fool?” Brett asked.

“Now,” the count brought up a bottle. “I think this is cool.”

I brought a towel and he wiped the bottle dry and held it up. “I like to
drink champagne from magnums. The wine is better but it would have been
too hard to cool.” He held the bottle, looking at it. I put out the
glasses.

“I say. You might open it,” Brett suggested.

“Yes, my dear. Now I’ll open it.”

It was amazing champagne.

“I say that is wine,” Brett held up her glass. “We ought to toast
something. ‘Here’s to royalty.’”

“This wine is too good for toast-drinking, my dear. You don’t want to
mix emotions up with a wine like that. You lose the taste.”

Brett’s glass was empty.

“You ought to write a book on wines, count,” I said.

“Mr. Barnes,” answered the count, “all I want out of wines is to enjoy
them.”

“Let’s enjoy a little more of this,” Brett pushed her glass forward. The
count poured very carefully. “There, my dear. Now you enjoy that slowly,
and then you can get drunk.”

“Drunk? Drunk?”

“My dear, you are charming when you are drunk.”

“Listen to the man.”

“Mr. Barnes,” the count poured my glass full. “She is the only lady I
have ever known who was as charming when she was drunk as when she was
sober.”

“You haven’t been around much, have you?”

“Yes, my dear. I have been around very much. I have been around a very
great deal.”

“Drink your wine,” said Brett. “We’ve all been around. I dare say Jake
here has seen as much as you have.”

“My dear, I am sure Mr. Barnes has seen a lot. Don’t think I don’t think
so, sir. I have seen a lot, too.”

“Of course you have, my dear,” Brett said. “I was only ragging.”

“I have been in seven wars and four revolutions,” the count said.

“Soldiering?” Brett asked.

“Sometimes, my dear. And I have got arrow wounds. Have you ever seen
arrow wounds?”

“Let’s have a look at them.”

The count stood up, unbuttoned his vest, and opened his shirt. He pulled
up the undershirt onto his chest and stood, his chest black, and big
stomach muscles bulging under the light.

“You see them?”

Below the line where his ribs stopped were two raised white welts. “See
on the back where they come out.” Above the small of the back were the
same two scars, raised as thick as a finger.

“I say. Those are something.”

“Clean through.”

The count was tucking in his shirt.

“Where did you get those?” I asked.

“In Abyssinia. When I was twenty-one years old.”

“What were you doing?” asked Brett. “Were you in the army?”

“I was on a business trip, my dear.”

“I told you he was one of us. Didn’t I?” Brett turned to me. “I love
you, count. You’re a darling.”

“You make me very happy, my dear. But it isn’t true.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“You see, Mr. Barnes, it is because I have lived very much that now I
can enjoy everything so well. Don’t you find it like that?”

“Yes. Absolutely.”

“I know,” said the count. “That is the secret. You must get to know the
values.”

“Doesn’t anything ever happen to your values?” Brett asked.

“No. Not any more.”

“Never fall in love?”

“Always,” said the count. “I am always in love.”

“What does that do to your values?”

“That, too, has got a place in my values.”

“You haven’t any values. You’re dead, that’s all.”

“No, my dear. You’re not right. I’m not dead at all.”

We drank three bottles of the champagne and the count left the basket in
my kitchen. We dined at a restaurant in the Bois. It was a good dinner.
Food had an excellent place in the count’s values. So did wine. The
count was in fine form during the meal. So was Brett. It was a good
party.

“Where would you like to go?” asked the count after dinner. We were the
only people left in the restaurant. The two waiters were standing over
against the door. They wanted to go home.

“We might go up on the hill,” Brett said. “Haven’t we had a splendid
party?”

The count was beaming. He was very happy.

“You are very nice people,” he said. He was smoking a cigar again. “Why
don’t you get married, you two?”

“We want to lead our own lives,” I said.

“We have our careers,” Brett said. “Come on. Let’s get out of this.”

“Have another brandy,” the count said.

“Get it on the hill.”

“No. Have it here where it is quiet.”

“You and your quiet,” said Brett. “What is it men feel about quiet?”

“We like it,” said the count. “Like you like noise, my dear.”

“All right,” said Brett. “Let’s have one.”

“Sommelier!” the count called.

“Yes, sir.”

“What is the oldest brandy you have?”

“Eighteen eleven, sir.”

“Bring us a bottle.”

“I say. Don’t be ostentatious. Call him off, Jake.”

“Listen, my dear. I get more value for my money in old brandy than in
any other antiquities.”

“Got many antiquities?”

“I got a houseful.”

Finally we went up to Montmartre. Inside Zelli’s it was crowded, smoky,
and noisy. The music hit you as you went in. Brett and I danced. It was
so crowded we could barely move. The nigger drummer waved at Brett. We
were caught in the jam, dancing in one place in front of him.

“Hahre you?”

“Great.”

“Thaats good.”

He was all teeth and lips.

“He’s a great friend of mine,” Brett said. “Damn good drummer.”

The music stopped and we started toward the table where the count sat.
Then the music started again and we danced. I looked at the count. He
was sitting at the table smoking a cigar. The music stopped again.

“Let’s go over.”

Brett started toward the table. The music started and again we danced,
tight in the crowd.

“You are a rotten dancer, Jake. Michael’s the best dancer I know.”

“He’s splendid.”

“He’s got his points.”

“I like him,” I said. “I’m damned fond of him.”

“I’m going to marry him,” Brett said. “Funny. I haven’t thought about
him for a week.”

“Don’t you write him?”

“Not I. Never write letters.”

“I’ll bet he writes to you.”

“Rather. Damned good letters, too.”

“When are you going to get married?”

“How do I know? As soon as we can get the divorce. Michael’s trying to
get his mother to put up for it.”

“Could I help you?”

“Don’t be an ass. Michael’s people have loads of money.”

The music stopped. We walked over to the table. The count stood up.

“Very nice,” he said. “You looked very, very nice.”

“Don’t you dance, count?” I asked.

“No. I’m too old.”

“Oh, come off it,” Brett said.

“My dear, I would do it if I would enjoy it. I enjoy to watch you
dance.”

“Splendid,” Brett said. “I’ll dance again for you some time. I say. What
about your little friend, Zizi?”

“Let me tell you. I support that boy, but I don’t want to have him
around.”

“He is rather hard.”

“You know I think that boy’s got a future. But personally I don’t want
him around.”

“Jake’s rather the same way.”

“He gives me the willys.”

“Well,” the count shrugged his shoulders. “About his future you can’t
ever tell. Anyhow, his father was a great friend of my father.”

“Come on. Let’s dance,” Brett said.

We danced. It was crowded and close.

“Oh, darling,” Brett said, “I’m so miserable.”

I had that feeling of going through something that has all happened
before. “You were happy a minute ago.”

The drummer shouted: “You can’t two time—”

“It’s all gone.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I don’t know. I just feel terribly.”

“. . . . . .” the drummer chanted. Then turned to his sticks.

“Want to go?”

I had the feeling as in a nightmare of it all being something repeated,
something I had been through and that now I must go through again.

“. . . . . .” the drummer sang softly.

“Let’s go,” said Brett. “You don’t mind.”

“. . . . . .” the drummer shouted and grinned at Brett.

“All right,” I said. We got out from the crowd. Brett went to the
dressing-room.

“Brett wants to go,” I said to the count. He nodded. “Does she? That’s
fine. You take the car. I’m going to stay here for a while, Mr. Barnes.”

We shook hands.

“It was a wonderful time,” I said. “I wish you would let me get this.” I
took a note out of my pocket.

“Mr. Barnes, don’t be ridiculous,” the count said.

Brett came over with her wrap on. She kissed the count and put her hand
on his shoulder to keep him from standing up. As we went out the door I
looked back and there were three girls at his table. We got into the big
car. Brett gave the chauffeur the address of her hotel.

“No, don’t come up,” she said at the hotel. She had rung and the door
was unlatched.

“Really?”

“No. Please.”

“Good night, Brett,” I said. “I’m sorry you feel rotten.”

“Good night, Jake. Good night, darling. I won’t see you again.” We
kissed standing at the door. She pushed me away. We kissed again. “Oh,
don’t!” Brett said.

She turned quickly and went into the hotel. The chauffeur drove me
around to my flat. I gave him twenty francs and he touched his cap and
said: “Good night, sir,” and drove off. I rang the bell. The door opened
and I went up-stairs and went to bed.




                                BOOK II




                                CHAPTER
                                   8


I did not see Brett again until she came back from San Sebastian. One
card came from her from there. It had a picture of the Concha, and said:
“Darling. Very quiet and healthy. Love to all the chaps. BRETT.”

Nor did I see Robert Cohn again. I heard Frances had left for England
and I had a note from Cohn saying he was going out in the country for a
couple of weeks, he did not know where, but that he wanted to hold me to
the fishing-trip in Spain we had talked about last winter. I could reach
him always, he wrote, through his bankers.

Brett was gone, I was not bothered by Cohn’s troubles, I rather enjoyed
not having to play tennis, there was plenty of work to do, I went often
to the races, dined with friends, and put in some extra time at the
office getting things ahead so I could leave it in charge of my
secretary when Bill Gorton and I should shove off to Spain the end of
June. Bill Gorton arrived, put up a couple of days at the flat and went
off to Vienna. He was very cheerful and said the States were wonderful.
New York was wonderful. There had been a grand theatrical season and a
whole crop of great young light heavyweights. Any one of them was a good
prospect to grow up, put on weight and trim Dempsey. Bill was very
happy. He had made a lot of money on his last book, and was going to
make a lot more. We had a good time while he was in Paris, and then he
went off to Vienna. He was coming back in three weeks and we would leave
for Spain to get in some fishing and go to the fiesta at Pamplona. He
wrote that Vienna was wonderful. Then a card from Budapest: “Jake,
Budapest is wonderful.” Then I got a wire: “Back on Monday.”

Monday evening he turned up at the flat. I heard his taxi stop and went
to the window and called to him; he waved and started up-stairs carrying
his bags. I met him on the stairs, and took one of the bags.

“Well,” I said, “I hear you had a wonderful trip.”

“Wonderful,” he said. “Budapest is absolutely wonderful.”

“How about Vienna?”

“Not so good, Jake. Not so good. It seemed better than it was.”

“How do you mean?” I was getting glasses and a siphon.

“Tight, Jake. I was tight.”

“That’s strange. Better have a drink.”

Bill rubbed his forehead. “Remarkable thing,” he said. “Don’t know how
it happened. Suddenly it happened.”

“Last long?”

“Four days, Jake. Lasted just four days.”

“Where did you go?”

“Don’t remember. Wrote you a post-card. Remember that perfectly.”

“Do anything else?”

“Not so sure. Possible.”

“Go on. Tell me about it.”

“Can’t remember. Tell you anything I could remember.”

“Go on. Take that drink and remember.”

“Might remember a little,” Bill said. “Remember something about a
prize-fight. Enormous Vienna prize-fight. Had a nigger in it. Remember
the nigger perfectly.”

“Go on.”

“Wonderful nigger. Looked like Tiger Flowers, only four times as big.
All of a sudden everybody started to throw things. Not me. Nigger’d just
knocked local boy down. Nigger put up his glove. Wanted to make a
speech. Awful noble-looking nigger. Started to make a speech. Then local
white boy hit him. Then he knocked white boy cold. Then everybody
commenced to throw chairs. Nigger went home with us in our car. Couldn’t
get his clothes. Wore my coat. Remember the whole thing now. Big
sporting evening.”

“What happened?”

“Loaned the nigger some clothes and went around with him to try and get
his money. Claimed nigger owed them money on account of wrecking hall.
Wonder who translated? Was it me?”

“Probably it wasn’t you.”

“You’re right. Wasn’t me at all. Was another fellow. Think we called him
the local Harvard man. Remember him now. Studying music.”

“How’d you come out?”

“Not so good, Jake. Injustice everywhere. Promoter claimed nigger
promised let local boy stay. Claimed nigger violated contract. Can’t
knock out Vienna boy in Vienna. ‘My God, Mister Gorton,’ said nigger, ‘I
didn’t do nothing in there for forty minutes but try and let him stay.
That white boy musta ruptured himself swinging at me. I never did hit
him.’”

“Did you get any money?”

“No money, Jake. All we could get was nigger’s clothes. Somebody took
his watch, too. Splendid nigger. Big mistake to have come to Vienna. Not
so good, Jake. Not so good.”

“What became of the nigger?”

“Went back to Cologne. Lives there. Married. Got a family. Going to
write me a letter and send me the money I loaned him. Wonderful nigger.
Hope I gave him the right address.”

“You probably did.”

“Well, anyway, let’s eat,” said Bill. “Unless you want me to tell you
some more travel stories.”

“Go on.”

“Let’s eat.”

We went down-stairs and out onto the Boulevard St. Michel in the warm
June evening.

“Where will we go?”

“Want to eat on the island?”

“Sure.”

We walked down the Boulevard. At the juncture of the Rue
Denfert-Rochereau with the Boulevard is a statue of two men in flowing
robes.

“I know who they are.” Bill eyed the monument. “Gentlemen who invented
pharmacy. Don’t try and fool me on Paris.”

We went on.

“Here’s a taxidermist’s,” Bill said. “Want to buy anything? Nice stuffed
dog?”

“Come on,” I said. “You’re pie-eyed.”

“Pretty nice stuffed dogs,” Bill said. “Certainly brighten up your
flat.”

“Come on.”

“Just one stuffed dog. I can take ’em or leave ’em alone. But listen,
Jake. Just one stuffed dog.”

“Come on.”

“Mean everything in the world to you after you bought it. Simple
exchange of values. You give them money. They give you a stuffed dog.”

“We’ll get one on the way back.”

“All right. Have it your own way. Road to hell paved with unbought
stuffed dogs. Not my fault.”

We went on.

“How’d you feel that way about dogs so sudden?”

“Always felt that way about dogs. Always been a great lover of stuffed
animals.”

We stopped and had a drink.

“Certainly like to drink,” Bill said. “You ought to try it some times,
Jake.”

“You’re about a hundred and forty-four ahead of me.”

“Ought not to daunt you. Never be daunted. Secret of my success. Never
been daunted. Never been daunted in public.”

“Where were you drinking?”

“Stopped at the Crillon. George made me a couple of Jack Roses. George’s
a great man. Know the secret of his success? Never been daunted.”

“You’ll be daunted after about three more pernods.”

“Not in public. If I begin to feel daunted I’ll go off by myself. I’m
like a cat that way.”

“When did you see Harvey Stone?”

“At the Crillon. Harvey was just a little daunted. Hadn’t eaten for
three days. Doesn’t eat any more. Just goes off like a cat. Pretty sad.”

“He’s all right.”

“Splendid. Wish he wouldn’t keep going off like a cat, though. Makes me
nervous.”

“What’ll we do to-night?”

“Doesn’t make any difference. Only let’s not get daunted. Suppose they
got any hard-boiled eggs here? If they had hard-boiled eggs here we
wouldn’t have to go all the way down to the island to eat.”

“Nix,” I said. “We’re going to have a regular meal.”

“Just a suggestion,” said Bill. “Want to start now?”

“Come on.”

We started on again down the Boulevard. A horse-cab passed us. Bill
looked at it.

“See that horse-cab? Going to have that horse-cab stuffed for you for
Christmas. Going to give all my friends stuffed animals. I’m a
nature-writer.”

A taxi passed, some one in it waved, then banged for the driver to stop.
The taxi backed up to the curb. In it was Brett.

“Beautiful lady,” said Bill. “Going to kidnap us.”

“Hullo!” Brett said. “Hullo!”

“This is Bill Gorton. Lady Ashley.”

Brett smiled at Bill. “I say I’m just back. Haven’t bathed even. Michael
comes in to-night.”

“Good. Come on and eat with us, and we’ll all go to meet him.”

“Must clean myself.”

“Oh, rot! Come on.”

“Must bathe. He doesn’t get in till nine.”

“Come and have a drink, then, before you bathe.”

“Might do that. Now you’re not talking rot.”

We got in the taxi. The driver looked around.

“Stop at the nearest bistro,” I said.

“We might as well go to the Closerie,” Brett said. “I can’t drink these
rotten brandies.”

“Closerie des Lilas.”

Brett turned to Bill.

“Have you been in this pestilential city long?”

“Just got in to-day from Budapest.”

“How was Budapest?”

“Wonderful. Budapest was wonderful.”

“Ask him about Vienna.”

“Vienna,” said Bill, “is a strange city.”

“Very much like Paris,” Brett smiled at him, wrinkling the corners of
her eyes.

“Exactly,” Bill said. “Very much like Paris at this moment.”

“You _have_ a good start.”

Sitting out on the terraces of the Lilas Brett ordered a whiskey and
soda, I took one, too, and Bill took another pernod.

“How are you, Jake?”

“Great,” I said. “I’ve had a good time.”

Brett looked at me. “I was a fool to go away,” she said. “One’s an ass
to leave Paris.”

“Did you have a good time?”

“Oh, all right. Interesting. Not frightfully amusing.”

“See anybody?”

“No, hardly anybody. I never went out.”

“Didn’t you swim?”

“No. Didn’t do a thing.”

“Sounds like Vienna,” Bill said.

Brett wrinkled up the corners of her eyes at him.

“So that’s the way it was in Vienna.”

“It was like everything in Vienna.”

Brett smiled at him again.

“You’ve a nice friend, Jake.”

“He’s all right,” I said. “He’s a taxidermist.”

“That was in another country,” Bill said. “And besides all the animals
were dead.”

“One more,” Brett said, “and I must run. Do send the waiter for a taxi.”

“There’s a line of them. Right out in front.”

“Good.”

We had the drink and put Brett into her taxi.

“Mind you’re at the Select around ten. Make him come. Michael will be
there.”

“We’ll be there,” Bill said. The taxi started and Brett waved.

“Quite a girl,” Bill said. “She’s damned nice. Who’s Michael?”

“The man she’s going to marry.”

“Well, well,” Bill said. “That’s always just the stage I meet anybody.
What’ll I send them? Think they’d like a couple of stuffed race-horses?”

“We better eat.”

“Is she really Lady something or other?” Bill asked in the taxi on our
way down to the Ile Saint Louis.

“Oh, yes. In the stud-book and everything.”

“Well, well.”

We ate dinner at Madame Lecomte’s restaurant on the far side of the
island. It was crowded with Americans and we had to stand up and wait
for a place. Some one had put it in the American Women’s Club list as a
quaint restaurant on the Paris quais as yet untouched by Americans, so
we had to wait forty-five minutes for a table. Bill had eaten at the
restaurant in 1918, and right after the armistice, and Madame Lecomte
made a great fuss over seeing him.

“Doesn’t get us a table, though,” Bill said. “Grand woman, though.”

We had a good meal, a roast chicken, new green beans, mashed potatoes, a
salad, and some apple-pie and cheese.

“You’ve got the world here all right,” Bill said to Madame Lecomte. She
raised her hand. “Oh, my God!”

“You’ll be rich.”

“I hope so.”

After the coffee and a _fine_ we got the bill, chalked up the same as
ever on a slate, that was doubtless one of the “quaint” features, paid
it, shook hands, and went out.

“You never come here any more, Monsieur Barnes,” Madame Lecomte said.

“Too many compatriots.”

“Come at lunch-time. It’s not crowded then.”

“Good. I’ll be down soon.”

We walked along under the trees that grew out over the river on the Quai
d’Orléans side of the island. Across the river were the broken walls of
old houses that were being torn down.

“They’re going to cut a street through.”

“They would,” Bill said.

We walked on and circled the island. The river was dark and a bateau
mouche went by, all bright with lights, going fast and quiet up and out
of sight under the bridge. Down the river was Notre Dame squatting
against the night sky. We crossed to the left bank of the Seine by the
wooden foot-bridge from the Quai de Bethune, and stopped on the bridge
and looked down the river at Notre Dame. Standing on the bridge the
island looked dark, the houses were high against the sky, and the trees
were shadows.

“It’s pretty grand,” Bill said. “God, I love to get back.”

We leaned on the wooden rail of the bridge and looked up the river to
the lights of the big bridges. Below the water was smooth and black. It
made no sound against the piles of the bridge. A man and a girl passed
us. They were walking with their arms around each other.

We crossed the bridge and walked up the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It was
steep walking, and we went all the way up to the Place Contrescarpe. The
arc-light shone through the leaves of the trees in the square, and
underneath the trees was an S bus ready to start. Music came out of the
door of the Negre Joyeux. Through the window of the Café Aux Amateurs I
saw the long zinc bar. Outside on the terrace working people were
drinking. In the open kitchen of the Amateurs a girl was cooking
potato-chips in oil. There was an iron pot of stew. The girl ladled some
onto a plate for an old man who stood holding a bottle of red wine in
one hand.

“Want to have a drink?”

“No,” said Bill. “I don’t need it.”

We turned to the right off the Place Contrescarpe, walking along smooth
narrow streets with high old houses on both sides. Some of the houses
jutted out toward the street. Others were cut back. We came onto the Rue
du Pot de Fer and followed it along until it brought us to the rigid
north and south of the Rue Saint Jacques and then walked south, past Val
de Grâce, set back behind the courtyard and the iron fence, to the
Boulevard du Port Royal.

“What do you want to do?” I asked. “Go up to the café and see Brett and
Mike?”

“Why not?”

We walked along Port Royal until it became Montparnasse, and then on
past the Lilas, Lavigne’s, and all the little cafés, Damoy’s, crossed
the street to the Rotonde, past its lights and tables to the Select.

Michael came toward us from the tables. He was tanned and
healthy-looking.

“Hel-lo, Jake,” he said. “Hel-lo! Hel-lo! How are you, old lad?”

“You look very fit, Mike.”

“Oh, I am. I’m frightfully fit. I’ve done nothing but walk. Walk all day
long. One drink a day with my mother at tea.”

Bill had gone into the bar. He was standing talking with Brett, who was
sitting on a high stool, her legs crossed. She had no stockings on.

“It’s good to see you, Jake,” Michael said. “I’m a little tight you
know. Amazing, isn’t it? Did you see my nose?”

There was a patch of dried blood on the bridge of his nose.

“An old lady’s bags did that,” Mike said. “I reached up to help her with
them and they fell on me.”

Brett gestured at him from the bar with her cigarette-holder and
wrinkled the corners of her eyes.

“An old lady,” said Mike. “Her bags _fell_ on me. Let’s go in and see
Brett. I say, she is a piece. You _are_ a lovely lady, Brett. Where did
you get that hat?”

“Chap bought it for me. Don’t you like it?”

“It’s a dreadful hat. Do get a good hat.”

“Oh, we’ve so much money now,” Brett said. “I say, haven’t you met Bill
yet? You _are_ a lovely host, Jake.”

She turned to Mike. “This is Bill Gorton. This drunkard is Mike
Campbell. Mr. Campbell is an undischarged bankrupt.”

“Aren’t I, though? You know I met my ex-partner yesterday in London.
Chap who did me in.”

“What did he say?”

“Bought me a drink. I thought I might as well take it. I say, Brett, you
_are_ a lovely piece. Don’t you think she’s beautiful?”

“Beautiful. With this nose?”

“It’s a lovely nose. Go on, point it at me. Isn’t she a lovely piece?”

“Couldn’t we have kept the man in Scotland?”

“I say, Brett, let’s turn in early.”

“Don’t be indecent, Michael. Remember there are ladies at this bar.”

“Isn’t she a lovely piece? Don’t you think so, Jake?”

“There’s a fight to-night,” Bill said. “Like to go?”

“Fight,” said Mike. “Who’s fighting?”

“Ledoux and somebody.”

“He’s very good, Ledoux,” Mike said. “I’d like to see it, rather”—he
was making an effort to pull himself together—“but I can’t go. I had a
date with this thing here. I say, Brett, do get a new hat.”

Brett pulled the felt hat down far over one eye and smiled out from
under it. “You two run along to the fight. I’ll have to be taking Mr.
Campbell home directly.”

“I’m not tight,” Mike said. “Perhaps just a little. I say, Brett, you
are a lovely piece.”

“Go on to the fight,” Brett said. “Mr. Campbell’s getting difficult.
What are these outbursts of affection, Michael?”

“I say, you are a lovely piece.”

We said good night. “I’m sorry I can’t go,” Mike said. Brett laughed. I
looked back from the door. Mike had one hand on the bar and was leaning
toward Brett, talking. Brett was looking at him quite coolly, but the
corners of her eyes were smiling.

Outside on the pavement I said: “Do you want to go to the fight?”

“Sure,” said Bill. “If we don’t have to walk.”

“Mike was pretty excited about his girl friend,” I said in the taxi.

“Well,” said Bill. “You can’t blame him such a hell of a lot.”




                                CHAPTER
                                   9


The Ledoux-Kid Francis fight was the night of the 20th of June. It was a
good fight. The morning after the fight I had a letter from Robert Cohn,
written from Hendaye. He was having a very quiet time, he said, bathing,
playing some golf and much bridge. Hendaye had a splendid beach, but he
was anxious to start on the fishing-trip. When would I be down? If I
would buy him a double-tapered line he would pay me when I came down.

That same morning I wrote Cohn from the office that Bill and I would
leave Paris on the 25th unless I wired him otherwise, and would meet him
at Bayonne, where we could get a bus over the mountains to Pamplona. The
same evening about seven o’clock I stopped in at the Select to see
Michael and Brett. They were not there, and I went over to the Dingo.
They were inside sitting at the bar.

“Hello, darling.” Brett put out her hand.

“Hello, Jake,” Mike said. “I understand I was tight last night.”

“Weren’t you, though,” Brett said. “Disgraceful business.”

“Look,” said Mike, “when do you go down to Spain? Would you mind if we
came down with you?”

“It would be grand.”

“You wouldn’t mind, really? I’ve been at Pamplona, you know. Brett’s mad
to go. You’re sure we wouldn’t just be a bloody nuisance?”

“Don’t talk like a fool.”

“I’m a little tight, you know. I wouldn’t ask you like this if I
weren’t. You’re sure you don’t mind?”

“Oh, shut up, Michael,” Brett said. “How can the man say he’d mind now?
I’ll ask him later.”

“But you don’t mind, do you?”

“Don’t ask that again unless you want to make me sore. Bill and I go
down on the morning of the 25th.”

“By the way, where is Bill?” Brett asked.

“He’s out at Chantilly dining with some people.”

“He’s a good chap.”

“Splendid chap,” said Mike. “He is, you know.”

“You don’t remember him,” Brett said.

“I do. Remember him perfectly. Look, Jake, we’ll come down the night of
the 25th. Brett can’t get up in the morning.”

“Indeed not!”

“If our money comes and you’re sure you don’t mind.”

“It will come, all right. I’ll see to that.”

“Tell me what tackle to send for.”

“Get two or three rods with reels, and lines, and some flies.”

“I won’t fish,” Brett put in.

“Get two rods, then, and Bill won’t have to buy one.”

“Right,” said Mike. “I’ll send a wire to the keeper.”

“Won’t it be splendid,” Brett said. “Spain! We _will_ have fun.”

“The 25th. When is that?”

“Saturday.”

“We _will_ have to get ready.”

“I say,” said Mike, “I’m going to the barber’s.”

“I must bathe,” said Brett. “Walk up to the hotel with me, Jake. Be a
good chap.”

“We _have_ got the loveliest hotel,” Mike said. “I think it’s a
brothel!”

“We left our bags here at the Dingo when we got in, and they asked us at
this hotel if we wanted a room for the afternoon only. Seemed
frightfully pleased we were going to stay all night.”

“_I_ believe it’s a brothel,” Mike said. “And _I_ should know.”

“Oh, shut it and go and get your hair cut.”

Mike went out. Brett and I sat on at the bar.

“Have another?”

“Might.”

“I needed that,” Brett said.

We walked up the Rue Delambre.

“I haven’t seen you since I’ve been back,” Brett said.

“No.”

“How _are_ you, Jake?”

“Fine.”

Brett looked at me. “I say,” she said, “is Robert Cohn going on this
trip?”

“Yes. Why?”

“Don’t you think it will be a bit rough on him?”

“Why should it?”

“Who did you think I went down to San Sebastian with?”

“Congratulations,” I said.

We walked along.

“What did you say that for?”

“I don’t know. What would you like me to say?”

We walked along and turned a corner.

“He behaved rather well, too. He gets a little dull.”

“Does he?”

“I rather thought it would be good for him.”

“You might take up social service.”

“Don’t be nasty.”

“I won’t.”

“Didn’t you really know?”

“No,” I said. “I guess I didn’t think about it.”

“Do you think it will be too rough on him?”

“That’s up to him,” I said. “Tell him you’re coming. He can always not
come.”

“I’ll write him and give him a chance to pull out of it.”

I did not see Brett again until the night of the 24th of June.

“Did you hear from Cohn?”

“Rather. He’s keen about it.”

“My God!”

“I thought it was rather odd myself.”

“Says he can’t wait to see me.”

“Does he think you’re coming alone?”

“No. I told him we were all coming down together. Michael and all.”

“He’s wonderful.”

“Isn’t he?”

They expected their money the next day. We arranged to meet at Pamplona.
They would go directly to San Sebastian and take the train from there.
We would all meet at the Montoya in Pamplona. If they did not turn up on
Monday at the latest we would go on ahead up to Burguete in the
mountains, to start fishing. There was a bus to Burguete. I wrote out an
itinerary so they could follow us.

Bill and I took the morning train from the Gare d’Orsay. It was a lovely
day, not too hot, and the country was beautiful from the start. We went
back into the diner and had breakfast. Leaving the dining-car I asked
the conductor for tickets for the first service.

“Nothing until the fifth.”

“What’s this?”

There were never more than two servings of lunch on that train, and
always plenty of places for both of them.

“They’re all reserved,” the dining-car conductor said. “There will be a
fifth service at three-thirty.”

“This is serious,” I said to Bill.

“Give him ten francs.”

“Here,” I said. “We want to eat in the first service.”

The conductor put the ten francs in his pocket.

“Thank you,” he said. “I would advise you gentlemen to get some
sandwiches. All the places for the first four services were reserved at
the office of the company.”

“You’ll go a long way, brother,” Bill said to him in English. “I suppose
if I’d given you five francs you would have advised us to jump off the
train.”

“_Comment?_”

“Go to hell!” said Bill. “Get the sandwiches made and a bottle of wine.
You tell him, Jake.”

“And send it up to the next car.” I described where we were.

In our compartment were a man and his wife and their young son.

“I suppose you’re Americans, aren’t you?” the man asked. “Having a good
trip?”

“Wonderful,” said Bill.

“That’s what you want to do. Travel while you’re young. Mother and I
always wanted to get over, but we had to wait a while.”

“You could have come over ten years ago, if you’d wanted to,” the wife
said. “What you always said was: ‘See America first!’ I will say we’ve
seen a good deal, take it one way and another.”

“Say, there’s plenty of Americans on this train,” the husband said.
“They’ve got seven cars of them from Dayton, Ohio. They’ve been on a
pilgrimage to Rome, and now they’re going down to Biarritz and Lourdes.”

“So, that’s what they are. Pilgrims. Goddam Puritans,” Bill said.

“What part of the States you boys from?”

“Kansas City,” I said. “He’s from Chicago.”

“You both going to Biarritz?”

“No. We’re going fishing in Spain.”

“Well, I never cared for it, myself. There’s plenty that do out where I
come from, though. We got some of the best fishing in the State of
Montana. I’ve been out with the boys, but I never cared for it any.”

“Mighty little fishing you did on them trips,” his wife said.

He winked at us.

“You know how the ladies are. If there’s a jug goes along, or a case of
beer, they think it’s hell and damnation.”

“That’s the way men are,” his wife said to us. She smoothed her
comfortable lap. “I voted against prohibition to please him, and because
I like a little beer in the house, and then he talks that way. It’s a
wonder they ever find any one to marry them.”

“Say,” said Bill, “do you know that gang of Pilgrim Fathers have
cornered the dining-car until half past three this afternoon?”

“How do you mean? They can’t do a thing like that.”

“You try and get seats.”

“Well, mother, it looks as though we better go back and get another
breakfast.”

She stood up and straightened her dress.

“Will you boys keep an eye on our things? Come on, Hubert.”

They all three went up to the wagon restaurant. A little while after
they were gone a steward went through announcing the first service, and
pilgrims, with their priests, commenced filing down the corridor. Our
friend and his family did not come back. A waiter passed in the corridor
with our sandwiches and the bottle of Chablis, and we called him in.

“You’re going to work to-day,” I said.

He nodded his head. “They start now, at ten-thirty.”

“When do we eat?”

“Huh! When do I eat?”

He left two glasses for the bottle, and we paid him for the sandwiches
and tipped him.

“I’ll get the plates,” he said, “or bring them with you.”

We ate the sandwiches and drank the Chablis and watched the country out
of the window. The grain was just beginning to ripen and the fields were
full of poppies. The pastureland was green, and there were fine trees,
and sometimes big rivers and chateaux off in the trees.

At Tours we got off and bought another bottle of wine, and when we got
back in the compartment the gentleman from Montana and his wife and his
son, Hubert, were sitting comfortably.

“Is there good swimming in Biarritz?” asked Hubert.

“That boy’s just crazy till he can get in the water,” his mother said.
“It’s pretty hard on youngsters travelling.”

“There’s good swimming,” I said. “But it’s dangerous when it’s rough.”

“Did you get a meal?” Bill asked.

“We sure did. We set right there when they started to come in, and they
must have just thought we were in the party. One of the waiters said
something to us in French, and then they just sent three of them back.”

“They thought we were snappers, all right,” the man said. “It certainly
shows you the power of the Catholic Church. It’s a pity you boys ain’t
Catholics. You could get a meal, then, all right.”

“I am,” I said. “That’s what makes me so sore.”

Finally at a quarter past four we had lunch. Bill had been rather
difficult at the last. He buttonholed a priest who was coming back with
one of the returning streams of pilgrims.

“When do us Protestants get a chance to eat, father?”

“I don’t know anything about it. Haven’t you got tickets?”

“It’s enough to make a man join the Klan,” Bill said. The priest looked
back at him.

Inside the dining-car the waiters served the fifth successive table
d’hôte meal. The waiter who served us was soaked through. His white
jacket was purple under the arms.

“He must drink a lot of wine.”

“Or wear purple undershirts.”

“Let’s ask him.”

“No. He’s too tired.”

The train stopped for half an hour at Bordeaux and we went out through
the station for a little walk. There was not time to get in to the town.
Afterward we passed through the Landes and watched the sun set. There
were wide fire-gaps cut through the pines, and you could look up them
like avenues and see wooded hills way off. About seven-thirty we had
dinner and watched the country through the open window in the diner. It
was all sandy pine country full of heather. There were little clearings
with houses in them, and once in a while we passed a sawmill. It got
dark and we could feel the country hot and sandy and dark outside of the
window, and about nine o’clock we got into Bayonne. The man and his wife
and Hubert all shook hands with us. They were going on to LaNegresse to
change for Biarritz.

“Well, I hope you have lots of luck,” he said.

“Be careful about those bull-fights.”

“Maybe we’ll see you at Biarritz,” Hubert said.

We got off with our bags and rod-cases and passed through the dark
station and out to the lights and the line of cabs and hotel buses.
There, standing with the hotel runners, was Robert Cohn. He did not see
us at first. Then he started forward.

“Hello, Jake. Have a good trip?”

“Fine,” I said. “This is Bill Gorton.”

“How are you?”

“Come on,” said Robert. “I’ve got a cab.” He was a little near-sighted.
I had never noticed it before. He was looking at Bill, trying to make
him out. He was shy, too.

“We’ll go up to my hotel. It’s all right. It’s quite nice.”

We got into the cab, and the cabman put the bags up on the seat beside
him and climbed up and cracked his whip, and we drove over the dark
bridge and into the town.

“I’m awfully glad to meet you,” Robert said to Bill. “I’ve heard so much
about you from Jake and I’ve read your books. Did you get my line,
Jake?”

The cab stopped in front of the hotel and we all got out and went in. It
was a nice hotel, and the people at the desk were very cheerful, and we
each had a good small room.




                                CHAPTER
                                   10


In the morning it was bright, and they were sprinkling the streets of
the town, and we all had breakfast in a café. Bayonne is a nice town. It
is like a very clean Spanish town and it is on a big river. Already, so
early in the morning, it was very hot on the bridge across the river. We
walked out on the bridge and then took a walk through the town.

I was not at all sure Mike’s rods would come from Scotland in time, so
we hunted a tackle store and finally bought a rod for Bill up-stairs
over a drygoods store. The man who sold the tackle was out, and we had
to wait for him to come back. Finally he came in, and we bought a pretty
good rod cheap, and two landing-nets.

We went out into the street again and took a look at the cathedral. Cohn
made some remark about it being a very good example of something or
other, I forget what. It seemed like a nice cathedral, nice and dim,
like Spanish churches. Then we went up past the old fort and out to the
local Syndicat d’Initiative office, where the bus was supposed to start
from. There they told us the bus service did not start until the 1st of
July. We found out at the tourist office what we ought to pay for a
motor-car to Pamplona and hired one at a big garage just around the
corner from the Municipal Theatre for four hundred francs. The car was
to pick us up at the hotel in forty minutes, and we stopped at the café
on the square where we had eaten breakfast, and had a beer. It was hot,
but the town had a cool, fresh, early-morning smell and it was pleasant
sitting in the café. A breeze started to blow, and you could feel that
the air came from the sea. There were pigeons out in the square, and the
houses were a yellow, sun-baked color, and I did not want to leave the
café. But we had to go to the hotel to get our bags packed and pay the
bill. We paid for the beers, we matched and I think Cohn paid, and went
up to the hotel. It was only sixteen francs apiece for Bill and me, with
ten per cent added for the service, and we had the bags sent down and
waited for Robert Cohn. While we were waiting I saw a cockroach on the
parquet floor that must have been at least three inches long. I pointed
him out to Bill and then put my shoe on him. We agreed he must have just
come in from the garden. It was really an awfully clean hotel.

Cohn came down, finally, and we all went out to the car. It was a big,
closed car, with a driver in a white duster with blue collar and cuffs,
and we had him put the back of the car down. He piled in the bags and we
started off up the street and out of the town. We passed some lovely
gardens and had a good look back at the town, and then we were out in
the country, green and rolling, and the road climbing all the time. We
passed lots of Basques with oxen, or cattle, hauling carts along the
road, and nice farmhouses, low roofs, and all white-plastered. In the
Basque country the land all looks very rich and green and the houses and
villages look well-off and clean. Every village had a pelota court and
on some of them kids were playing in the hot sun. There were signs on
the walls of the churches saying it was forbidden to play pelota against
them, and the houses in the villages had red tiled roofs, and then the
road turned off and commenced to climb and we were going way up close
along a hillside, with a valley below and hills stretched off back
toward the sea. You couldn’t see the sea. It was too far away. You could
see only hills and more hills, and you knew where the sea was.

We crossed the Spanish frontier. There was a little stream and a bridge,
and Spanish carabineers, with patent-leather Bonaparte hats, and short
guns on their backs, on one side, and on the other fat Frenchmen in
kepis and mustaches. They only opened one bag and took the passports in
and looked at them. There was a general store and inn on each side of
the line. The chauffeur had to go in and fill out some papers about the
car and we got out and went over to the stream to see if there were any
trout. Bill tried to talk some Spanish to one of the carabineers, but it
did not go very well. Robert Cohn asked, pointing with his finger, if
there were any trout in the stream, and the carabineer said yes, but not
many.

I asked him if he ever fished, and he said no, that he didn’t care for
it.

Just then an old man with long, sunburned hair and beard, and clothes
that looked as though they were made of gunny-sacking, came striding up
to the bridge. He was carrying a long staff, and he had a kid slung on
his back, tied by the four legs, the head hanging down.

The carabineer waved him back with his sword. The man turned without
saying anything, and started back up the white road into Spain.

“What’s the matter with the old one?” I asked.

“He hasn’t got any passport.”

I offered the guard a cigarette. He took it and thanked me.

“What will he do?” I asked.

The guard spat in the dust.

“Oh, he’ll just wade across the stream.”

“Do you have much smuggling?”

“Oh,” he said, “they go through.”

The chauffeur came out, folding up the papers and putting them in the
inside pocket of his coat. We all got in the car and it started up the
white dusty road into Spain. For a while the country was much as it had
been; then, climbing all the time, we crossed the top of a Col, the road
winding back and forth on itself, and then it was really Spain. There
were long brown mountains and a few pines and far-off forests of
beech-trees on some of the mountainsides. The road went along the summit
of the Col and then dropped down, and the driver had to honk, and slow
up, and turn out to avoid running into two donkeys that were sleeping in
the road. We came down out of the mountains and through an oak forest,
and there were white cattle grazing in the forest. Down below there were
grassy plains and clear streams, and then we crossed a stream and went
through a gloomy little village, and started to climb again. We climbed
up and up and crossed another high Col and turned along it, and the road
ran down to the right, and we saw a whole new range of mountains off to
the south, all brown and baked-looking and furrowed in strange shapes.

After a while we came out of the mountains, and there were trees along
both sides of the road, and a stream and ripe fields of grain, and the
road went on, very white and straight ahead, and then lifted to a little
rise, and off on the left was a hill with an old castle, with buildings
close around it and a field of grain going right up to the walls and
shifting in the wind. I was up in front with the driver and I turned
around. Robert Cohn was asleep, but Bill looked and nodded his head.
Then we crossed a wide plain, and there was a big river off on the right
shining in the sun from between the line of trees, and away off you
could see the plateau of Pamplona rising out of the plain, and the walls
of the city, and the great brown cathedral, and the broken skyline of
the other churches. In back of the plateau were the mountains, and every
way you looked there were other mountains, and ahead the road stretched
out white across the plain going toward Pamplona.

We came into the town on the other side of the plateau, the road
slanting up steeply and dustily with shade-trees on both sides, and then
levelling out through the new part of town they are building up outside
the old walls. We passed the bull-ring, high and white and
concrete-looking in the sun, and then came into the big square by a side
street and stopped in front of the Hotel Montoya.

The driver helped us down with the bags. There was a crowd of kids
watching the car, and the square was hot, and the trees were green, and
the flags hung on their staffs, and it was good to get out of the sun
and under the shade of the arcade that runs all the way around the
square. Montoya was glad to see us, and shook hands and gave us good
rooms looking out on the square, and then we washed and cleaned up and
went down-stairs in the dining-room for lunch. The driver stayed for
lunch, too, and afterward we paid him and he started back to Bayonne.

There are two dining-rooms in the Montoya. One is up-stairs on the
second floor and looks out on the square. The other is down one floor
below the level of the square and has a door that opens on the back
street that the bulls pass along when they run through the streets early
in the morning on their way to the ring. It is always cool in the
down-stairs dining-room and we had a very good lunch. The first meal in
Spain was always a shock with the hors d’œuvres, an egg course, two meat
courses, vegetables, salad, and dessert and fruit. You have to drink
plenty of wine to get it all down. Robert Cohn tried to say he did not
want any of the second meat course, but we would not interpret for him,
and so the waitress brought him something else as a replacement, a plate
of cold meats, I think. Cohn had been rather nervous ever since we had
met at Bayonne. He did not know whether we knew Brett had been with him
at San Sebastian, and it made him rather awkward.

“Well,” I said, “Brett and Mike ought to get in to-night.”

“I’m not sure they’ll come,” Cohn said.

“Why not?” Bill said. “Of course they’ll come.”

“They’re always late,” I said.

“I rather think they’re not coming,” Robert Cohn said.

He said it with an air of superior knowledge that irritated both of us.

“I’ll bet you fifty pesetas they’re here to-night,” Bill said. He always
bets when he is angered, and so he usually bets foolishly.

“I’ll take it,” Cohn said. “Good. You remember it, Jake. Fifty pesetas.”

“I’ll remember it myself,” Bill said. I saw he was angry and wanted to
smooth him down.

“It’s a sure thing they’ll come,” I said. “But maybe not to-night.”

“Want to call it off?” Cohn asked.

“No. Why should I? Make it a hundred if you like.”

“All right. I’ll take that.”

“That’s enough,” I said. “Or you’ll have to make a book and give me some
of it.”

“I’m satisfied,” Cohn said. He smiled. “You’ll probably win it back at
bridge, anyway.”

“You haven’t got it yet,” Bill said.

We went out to walk around under the arcade to the Café Iruña for
coffee. Cohn said he was going over and get a shave.

“Say,” Bill said to me, “have I got any chance on that bet?”

“You’ve got a rotten chance. They’ve never been on time anywhere. If
their money doesn’t come it’s a cinch they won’t get in to-night.”

“I was sorry as soon as I opened my mouth. But I had to call him. He’s
all right, I guess, but where does he get this inside stuff? Mike and
Brett fixed it up with us about coming down here.”

I saw Cohn coming over across the square.

“Here he comes.”

“Well, let him not get superior and Jewish.”

“The barber shop’s closed,” Cohn said. “It’s not open till four.”

We had coffee at the Iruña, sitting in comfortable wicker chairs looking
out from the cool of the arcade at the big square. After a while Bill
went to write some letters and Cohn went over to the barber-shop. It was
still closed, so he decided to go up to the hotel and get a bath, and I
sat out in front of the café and then went for a walk in the town. It
was very hot, but I kept on the shady side of the streets and went
through the market and had a good time seeing the town again. I went to
the Ayuntamiento and found the old gentleman who subscribes for the
bull-fight tickets for me every year, and he had gotten the money I sent
him from Paris and renewed my subscriptions, so that was all set. He was
the archivist, and all the archives of the town were in his office. That
has nothing to do with the story. Anyway, his office had a green baize
door and a big wooden door, and when I went out I left him sitting among
the archives that covered all the walls, and I shut both the doors, and
as I went out of the building into the street the porter stopped me to
brush off my coat.

“You must have been in a motor-car,” he said.

The back of the collar and the upper part of the shoulders were gray
with dust.

“From Bayonne.”

“Well, well,” he said. “I knew you were in a motor-car from the way the
dust was.” So I gave him two copper coins.

At the end of the street I saw the cathedral and walked up toward it.
The first time I ever saw it I thought the façade was ugly but I liked
it now. I went inside. It was dim and dark and the pillars went high up,
and there were people praying, and it smelt of incense, and there were
some wonderful big windows. I knelt and started to pray and prayed for
everybody I thought of, Brett and Mike and Bill and Robert Cohn and
myself, and all the bull-fighters, separately for the ones I liked, and
lumping all the rest, then I prayed for myself again, and while I was
praying for myself I found I was getting sleepy, so I prayed that the
bull-fights would be good, and that it would be a fine fiesta, and that
we would get some fishing. I wondered if there was anything else I might
pray for, and I thought I would like to have some money, so I prayed
that I would make a lot of money, and then I started to think how I
would make it, and thinking of making money reminded me of the count,
and I started wondering about where he was, and regretting I hadn’t seen
him since that night in Montmartre, and about something funny Brett told
me about him, and as all the time I was kneeling with my forehead on the
wood in front of me, and was thinking of myself as praying, I was a
little ashamed, and regretted that I was such a rotten Catholic, but
realized there was nothing I could do about it, at least for a while,
and maybe never, but that anyway it was a grand religion, and I only
wished I felt religious and maybe I would the next time; and then I was
out in the hot sun on the steps of the cathedral, and the forefingers
and the thumb of my right hand were still damp, and I felt them dry in
the sun. The sunlight was hot and hard, and I crossed over beside some
buildings, and walked back along side-streets to the hotel.

At dinner that night we found that Robert Cohn had taken a bath, had had
a shave and a haircut and a shampoo, and something put on his hair
afterward to make it stay down. He was nervous, and I did not try to
help him any. The train was due in at nine o’clock from San Sebastian,
and, if Brett and Mike were coming, they would be on it. At twenty
minutes to nine we were not half through dinner. Robert Cohn got up from
the table and said he would go to the station. I said I would go with
him, just to devil him. Bill said he would be damned if he would leave
his dinner. I said we would be right back.

We walked to the station. I was enjoying Cohn’s nervousness. I hoped
Brett would be on the train. At the station the train was late, and we
sat on a baggage-truck and waited outside in the dark. I have never seen
a man in civil life as nervous as Robert Cohn—nor as eager. I was
enjoying it. It was lousy to enjoy it, but I felt lousy. Cohn had a
wonderful quality of bringing out the worst in anybody.

After a while we heard the train-whistle way off below on the other side
of the plateau, and then we saw the headlight coming up the hill. We
went inside the station and stood with a crowd of people just back of
the gates, and the train came in and stopped, and everybody started
coming out through the gates.

They were not in the crowd. We waited till everybody had gone through
and out of the station and gotten into buses, or taken cabs, or were
walking with their friends or relatives through the dark into the town.

“I knew they wouldn’t come,” Robert said. We were going back to the
hotel.

“I thought they might,” I said.

Bill was eating fruit when we came in and finishing a bottle of wine.

“Didn’t come, eh?”

“No.”

“Do you mind if I give you that hundred pesetas in the morning, Cohn?”
Bill asked. “I haven’t changed any money here yet.”

“Oh, forget about it,” Robert Cohn said. “Let’s bet on something else.
Can you bet on bull-fights?”

“You could,” Bill said, “but you don’t need to.”

“It would be like betting on the war,” I said. “You don’t need any
economic interest.”

“I’m very curious to see them,” Robert said.

Montoya came up to our table. He had a telegram in his hand. “It’s for
you.” He handed it to me.

It read: “Stopped night San Sebastian.”

“It’s from them,” I said. I put it in my pocket. Ordinarily I should
have handed it over.

“They’ve stopped over in San Sebastian,” I said. “Send their regards to
you.”

Why I felt that impulse to devil him I do not know. Of course I do know.
I was blind, unforgivingly jealous of what had happened to him. The fact
that I took it as a matter of course did not alter that any. I certainly
did hate him. I do not think I ever really hated him until he had that
little spell of superiority at lunch—that and when he went through all
that barbering. So I put the telegram in my pocket. The telegram came to
me, anyway.

“Well,” I said. “We ought to pull out on the noon bus for Burguete. They
can follow us if they get in to-morrow night.”

There were only two trains up from San Sebastian, an early morning train
and the one we had just met.

“That sounds like a good idea,” Cohn said.

“The sooner we get on the stream the better.”

“It’s all one to me when we start,” Bill said. “The sooner the better.”

We sat in the Iruña for a while and had coffee and then took a little
walk out to the bull-ring and across the field and under the trees at
the edge of the cliff and looked down at the river in the dark, and I
turned in early. Bill and Cohn stayed out in the café quite late, I
believe, because I was asleep when they came in.

In the morning I bought three tickets for the bus to Burguete. It was
scheduled to leave at two o’clock. There was nothing earlier. I was
sitting over at the Iruña reading the papers when I saw Robert Cohn
coming across the square. He came up to the table and sat down in one of
the wicker chairs.

“This is a comfortable café,” he said. “Did you have a good night,
Jake?”

“I slept like a log.”

“I didn’t sleep very well. Bill and I were out late, too.”

“Where were you?”

“Here. And after it shut we went over to that other café. The old man
there speaks German and English.”

“The Café Suizo.”

“That’s it. He seems like a nice old fellow. I think it’s a better café
than this one.”

“It’s not so good in the daytime,” I said. “Too hot. By the way, I got
the bus tickets.”

“I’m not going up to-day. You and Bill go on ahead.”

“I’ve got your ticket.”

“Give it to me. I’ll get the money back.”

“It’s five pesetas.”

Robert Cohn took out a silver five-peseta piece and gave it to me.

“I ought to stay,” he said. “You see I’m afraid there’s some sort of
misunderstanding.”

“Why,” I said. “They may not come here for three or four days now if
they start on parties at San Sebastian.”

“That’s just it,” said Robert. “I’m afraid they expected to meet me at
San Sebastian, and that’s why they stopped over.”

“What makes you think that?”

“Well, I wrote suggesting it to Brett.”

“Why in hell didn’t you stay there and meet them then?” I started to
say, but I stopped. I thought that idea would come to him by itself, but
I do not believe it ever did.

He was being confidential now and it was giving him pleasure to be able
to talk with the understanding that I knew there was something between
him and Brett.

“Well, Bill and I will go up right after lunch,” I said.

“I wish I could go. We’ve been looking forward to this fishing all
winter.” He was being sentimental about it. “But I ought to stay. I
really ought. As soon as they come I’ll bring them right up.”

“Let’s find Bill.”

“I want to go over to the barber-shop.”

“See you at lunch.”

I found Bill up in his room. He was shaving.

“Oh, yes, he told me all about it last night,” Bill said. “He’s a great
little confider. He said he had a date with Brett at San Sebastian.”

“The lying bastard!”

“Oh, no,” said Bill. “Don’t get sore. Don’t get sore at this stage of
the trip. How did you ever happen to know this fellow, anyway?”

“Don’t rub it in.”

Bill looked around, half-shaved, and then went on talking into the
mirror while he lathered his face.

“Didn’t you send him with a letter to me in New York last winter? Thank
God, I’m a travelling man. Haven’t you got some more Jewish friends you
could bring along?” He rubbed his chin with his thumb, looked at it, and
then started scraping again.

“You’ve got some fine ones yourself.”

“Oh, yes. I’ve got some darbs. But not alongside of this Robert Cohn.
The funny thing is he’s nice, too. I like him. But he’s just so awful.”

“He can be damn nice.”

“I know it. That’s the terrible part.”

I laughed.

“Yes. Go on and laugh,” said Bill. “You weren’t out with him last night
until two o’clock.”

“Was he very bad?”

“Awful. What’s all this about him and Brett, anyway? Did she ever have
anything to do with him?”

He raised his chin up and pulled it from side to side.

“Sure. She went down to San Sebastian with him.”

“What a damn-fool thing to do. Why did she do that?”

“She wanted to get out of town and she can’t go anywhere alone. She said
she thought it would be good for him.”

“What bloody-fool things people do. Why didn’t she go off with some of
her own people? Or you?”—he slurred that over—“or me? Why not me?” He
looked at his face carefully in the glass, put a big dab of lather on
each cheek-bone. “It’s an honest face. It’s a face any woman would be
safe with.”

“She’d never seen it.”

“She should have. All women should see it. It’s a face that ought to be
thrown on every screen in the country. Every woman ought to be given a
copy of this face as she leaves the altar. Mothers should tell their
daughters about this face. My son”—he pointed the razor at me—“go west
with this face and grow up with the country.”

He ducked down to the bowl, rinsed his face with cold water, put on some
alcohol, and then looked at himself carefully in the glass, pulling down
his long upper lip.

“My God!” he said, “isn’t it an awful face?”

He looked in the glass.

“And as for this Robert Cohn,” Bill said, “he makes me sick, and he can
go to hell, and I’m damn glad he’s staying here so we won’t have him
fishing with us.”

“You’re damn right.”

“We’re going trout-fishing. We’re going trout-fishing in the Irati
River, and we’re going to get tight now at lunch on the wine of the
country, and then take a swell bus ride.”

“Come on. Let’s go over to the Iruña and start,” I said.




                                CHAPTER
                                   11


It was baking hot in the square when we came out after lunch with our
bags and the rod-case to go to Burguete. People were on top of the bus,
and others were climbing up a ladder. Bill went up and Robert sat beside
Bill to save a place for me, and I went back in the hotel to get a
couple of bottles of wine to take with us. When I came out the bus was
crowded. Men and women were sitting on all the baggage and boxes on top,
and the women all had their fans going in the sun. It certainly was hot.
Robert climbed down and I fitted into the place he had saved on the one
wooden seat that ran across the top.

Robert Cohn stood in the shade of the arcade waiting for us start. A
Basque with a big leather wine-bag in his lap lay across the top of the
bus in front of our seat, leaning back against our legs. He offered the
wine-skin to Bill and to me, and when I tipped it up to drink he
imitated the sound of a klaxon motor-horn so well and so suddenly that I
spilled some of the wine, and everybody laughed. He apologized and made
me take another drink. He made the klaxon again a little later, and it
fooled me the second time. He was very good at it. The Basques liked it.
The man next to Bill was talking to him in Spanish and Bill was not
getting it, so he offered the man one of the bottles of wine. The man
waved it away. He said it was too hot and he had drunk too much at
lunch. When Bill offered the bottle the second time he took a long
drink, and then the bottle went all over that part of the bus. Every one
took a drink very politely, and then they made us cork it up and put it
away. They all wanted us to drink from their leather wine-bottles. They
were peasants going up into the hills.

Finally, after a couple more false klaxons, the bus started, and Robert
Cohn waved good-by to us, and all the Basques waved good-by to him. As
soon as we started out on the road outside of town it was cool. It felt
nice riding high up and close under the trees. The bus went quite fast
and made a good breeze, and as we went out along the road with the dust
powdering the trees and down the hill, we had a fine view, back through
the trees, of the town rising up from the bluff above the river. The
Basque lying against my knees pointed out the view with the neck of the
wine-bottle, and winked at us. He nodded his head.

“Pretty nice, eh?”

“These Basques are swell people,” Bill said.

The Basque lying against my legs was tanned the color of saddle-leather.
He wore a black smock like all the rest. There were wrinkles in his
tanned neck. He turned around and offered his wine-bag to Bill. Bill
handed him one of our bottles. The Basque wagged a forefinger at him and
handed the bottle back, slapping in the cork with the palm of his hand.
He shoved the wine-bag up.

“Arriba! Arriba!” he said. “Lift it up.”

Bill raised the wine-skin and let the stream of wine spurt out and into
his mouth, his head tipped back. When he stopped drinking and tipped the
leather bottle down a few drops ran down his chin.

“No! No!” several Basques said. “Not like that.” One snatched the bottle
away from the owner, who was himself about to give a demonstration. He
was a young fellow and he held the wine-bottle at full arms’ length and
raised it high up, squeezing the leather bag with his hand so the stream
of wine hissed into his mouth. He held the bag out there, the wine
making a flat, hard trajectory into his mouth, and he kept on swallowing
smoothly and regularly.

“Hey!” the owner of the bottle shouted. “Whose wine is that?”

The drinker waggled his little finger at him and smiled at us with his
eyes. Then he bit the stream off sharp, made a quick lift with the
wine-bag and lowered it down to the owner. He winked at us. The owner
shook the wine-skin sadly.

We passed through a town and stopped in front of the posada, and the
driver took on several packages. Then we started on again, and outside
the town the road commenced to mount. We were going through farming
country with rocky hills that sloped down into the fields. The
grain-fields went up the hillsides. Now as we went higher there was a
wind blowing the grain. The road was white and dusty, and the dust rose
under the wheels and hung in the air behind us. The road climbed up into
the hills and left the rich grain-fields below. Now there were only
patches of grain on the bare hillsides and on each side of the
water-courses. We turned sharply out to the side of the road to give
room to pass to a long string of six mules, following one after the
other, hauling a high-hooded wagon loaded with freight. The wagon and
the mules were covered with dust. Close behind was another string of
mules and another wagon. This was loaded with lumber, and the arriero
driving the mules leaned back and put on the thick wooden brakes as we
passed. Up here the country was quite barren and the hills were rocky
and hard-baked clay furrowed by the rain.

We came around a curve into a town, and on both sides opened out a
sudden green valley. A stream went through the centre of the town and
fields of grapes touched the houses.

The bus stopped in front of a posada and many of the passengers got
down, and a lot of the baggage was unstrapped from the roof from under
the big tarpaulins and lifted down. Bill and I got down and went into
the posada. There was a low, dark room with saddles and harness, and
hay-forks made of white wood, and clusters of canvas rope-soled shoes
and hams and slabs of bacon and white garlics and long sausages hanging
from the roof. It was cool and dusky, and we stood in front of a long
wooden counter with two women behind it serving drinks. Behind them were
shelves stacked with supplies and goods.

We each had an aguardiente and paid forty centimes for the two drinks. I
gave the woman fifty centimes to make a tip, and she gave me back the
copper piece, thinking I had misunderstood the price.

Two of our Basques came in and insisted on buying a drink. So they
bought a drink and then we bought a drink, and then they slapped us on
the back and bought another drink. Then we bought, and then we all went
out into the sunlight and the heat, and climbed back on top of the bus.
There was plenty of room now for every one to sit on the seat, and the
Basque who had been lying on the tin roof now sat between us. The woman
who had been serving drinks came out wiping her hands on her apron and
talked to somebody inside the bus. Then the driver came out swinging two
flat leather mail-pouches and climbed up, and everybody waving we
started off.

The road left the green valley at once, and we were up in the hills
again. Bill and the wine-bottle Basque were having a conversation. A man
leaned over from the other side of the seat and asked in English:
“You’re Americans?”

“Sure.”

“I been there,” he said. “Forty years ago.”

He was an old man, as brown as the others, with the stubble of a white
beard.

“How was it?”

“What you say?”

“How was America?”

“Oh, I was in California. It was fine.”

“Why did you leave?”

“What you say?”

“Why did you come back here?”

“Oh! I come back to get married. I was going to go back but my wife she
don’t like to travel. Where you from?”

“Kansas City.”

“I been there,” he said. “I been in Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City,
Denver, Los Angeles, Salt Lake City.”

He named them carefully.

“How long were you over?”

“Fifteen years. Then I come back and got married.”

“Have a drink?”

“All right,” he said. “You can’t get this in America, eh?”

“There’s plenty if you can pay for it.”

“What you come over here for?”

“We’re going to the fiesta at Pamplona.”

“You like the bull-fights?”

“Sure. Don’t you?”

“Yes,” he said. “I guess I like them.”

Then after a little:

“Where you go now?”

“Up to Burguete to fish.”

“Well,” he said, “I hope you catch something.”

He shook hands and turned around to the back seat again. The other
Basques had been impressed. He sat back comfortably and smiled at me
when I turned around to look at the country. But the effort of talking
American seemed to have tired him. He did not say anything after that.

The bus climbed steadily up the road. The country was barren and rocks
stuck up through the clay. There was no grass beside the road. Looking
back we could see the country spread out below. Far back the fields were
squares of green and brown on the hillsides. Making the horizon were the
brown mountains. They were strangely shaped. As we climbed higher the
horizon kept changing. As the bus ground slowly up the road we could see
other mountains coming up in the south. Then the road came over the
crest, flattened out, and went into a forest. It was a forest of cork
oaks, and the sun came through the trees in patches, and there were
cattle grazing back in the trees. We went through the forest and the
road came out and turned along a rise of land, and out ahead of us was a
rolling green plain, with dark mountains beyond it. These were not like
the brown, heat-baked mountains we had left behind. These were wooded
and there were clouds coming down from them. The green plain stretched
off. It was cut by fences and the white of the road showed through the
trunks of a double line of trees that crossed the plain toward the
north. As we came to the edge of the rise we saw the red roofs and white
houses of Burguete ahead strung out on the plain, and away off on the
shoulder of the first dark mountain was the gray metal-sheathed roof of
the monastery of Roncesvalles.

“There’s Roncevaux,” I said.

“Where?”

“Way off there where the mountain starts.”

“It’s cold up here,” Bill said.

“It’s high,” I said. “It must be twelve hundred metres.”

“It’s awful cold,” Bill said.

The bus levelled down onto the straight line of road that ran to
Burguete. We passed a crossroads and crossed a bridge over a stream. The
houses of Burguete were along both sides of the road. There were no
side-streets. We passed the church and the school-yard, and the bus
stopped. We got down and the driver handed down our bags and the
rod-case. A carabineer in his cocked hat and yellow leather cross-straps
came up.

“What’s in there?” he pointed to the rod-case.

I opened it and showed him. He asked to see our fishing permits and I
got them out. He looked at the date and then waved us on.

“Is that all right?” I asked.

“Yes. Of course.”

We went up the street, past the whitewashed stone houses, families
sitting in their doorways watching us, to the inn.

The fat woman who ran the inn came out from the kitchen and shook hands
with us. She took off her spectacles, wiped them, and put them on again.
It was cold in the inn and the wind was starting to blow outside. The
woman sent a girl up-stairs with us to show the room. There were two
beds, a washstand, a clothes-chest, and a big, framed steel-engraving of
Nuestra Señora de Roncesvalles. The wind was blowing against the
shutters. The room was on the north side of the inn. We washed, put on
sweaters, and came down-stairs into the dining-room. It had a stone
floor, low ceiling, and was oak-panelled. The shutters were up and it
was so cold you could see your breath.

“My God!” said Bill. “It can’t be this cold to-morrow. I’m not going to
wade a stream in this weather.”

There was an upright piano in the far corner of the room beyond the
wooden tables and Bill went over and started to play.

“I got to keep warm,” he said.

I went out to find the woman and ask her how much the room and board
was. She put her hands under her apron and looked away from me.

“Twelve pesetas.”

“Why, we only paid that in Pamplona.”

She did not say anything, just took off her glasses and wiped them on
her apron.

“That’s too much,” I said. “We didn’t pay more than that at a big
hotel.”

“We’ve put in a bathroom.”

“Haven’t you got anything cheaper?”

“Not in the summer. Now is the big season.”

We were the only people in the inn. Well, I thought, it’s only a few
days.

“Is the wine included?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Well,” I said. “It’s all right.”

I went back to Bill. He blew his breath at me to show how cold it was,
and went on playing. I sat at one of the tables and looked at the
pictures on the wall. There was one panel of rabbits, dead, one of
pheasants, also dead, and one panel of dead ducks. The panels were all
dark and smoky-looking. There was a cupboard full of liqueur bottles. I
looked at them all. Bill was still playing. “How about a hot rum punch?”
he said. “This isn’t going to keep me warm permanently.”

I went out and told the woman what a rum punch was and how to make it.
In a few minutes a girl brought a stone pitcher, steaming, into the
room. Bill came over from the piano and we drank the hot punch and
listened to the wind.

“There isn’t too much rum in that.”

I went over to the cupboard and brought the rum bottle and poured a
half-tumblerful into the pitcher.

“Direct action,” said Bill. “It beats legislation.”

The girl came in and laid the table for supper.

“It blows like hell up here,” Bill said.

The girl brought in a big bowl of hot vegetable soup and the wine. We
had fried trout afterward and some sort of a stew and a big bowl full of
wild strawberries. We did not lose money on the wine, and the girl was
shy but nice about bringing it. The old woman looked in once and counted
the empty bottles.

After supper we went up-stairs and smoked and read in bed to keep warm.
Once in the night I woke and heard the wind blowing. It felt good to be
warm and in bed.




                                CHAPTER
                                   12


When I woke in the morning I went to the window and looked out. It had
cleared and there were no clouds on the mountains. Outside under the
window were some carts and an old diligence, the wood of the roof
cracked and split by the weather. It must have been left from the days
before the motor-buses. A goat hopped up on one of the carts and then to
the roof of the diligence. He jerked his head at the other goats below
and when I waved at him he bounded down.

Bill was still sleeping, so I dressed, put on my shoes outside in the
hall, and went down-stairs. No one was stirring down-stairs, so I
unbolted the door and went out. It was cool outside in the early morning
and the sun had not yet dried the dew that had come when the wind died
down. I hunted around in the shed behind the inn and found a sort of
mattock, and went down toward the stream to try and dig some worms for
bait. The stream was clear and shallow but it did not look trouty. On
the grassy bank where it was damp I drove the mattock into the earth and
loosened a chunk of sod. There were worms underneath. They slid out of
sight as I lifted the sod and I dug carefully and got a good many.
Digging at the edge of the damp ground I filled two empty tobacco-tins
with worms and sifted dirt onto them. The goats watched me dig.

When I went back into the inn the woman was down in the kitchen, and I
asked her to get coffee for us, and that we wanted a lunch. Bill was
awake and sitting on the edge of the bed.

“I saw you out of the window,” he said. “Didn’t want to interrupt you.
What were you doing? Burying your money?”

“You lazy bum!”

“Been working for the common good? Splendid. I want you to do that every
morning.”

“Come on,” I said. “Get up.”

“What? Get up? I never get up.”

He climbed into bed and pulled the sheet up to his chin.

“Try and argue me into getting up.”

I went on looking for the tackle and putting it all together in the
tackle-bag.

“Aren’t you interested?” Bill asked.

“I’m going down and eat.”

“Eat? Why didn’t you say eat? I thought you just wanted me to get up for
fun. Eat? Fine. Now you’re reasonable. You go out and dig some more
worms and I’ll be right down.”

“Oh, go to hell!”

“Work for the good of all.” Bill stepped into his underclothes. “Show
irony and pity.”

I started out of the room with the tackle-bag, the nets, and the
rod-case.

“Hey! come back!”

I put my head in the door.

“Aren’t you going to show a little irony and pity?”

I thumbed my nose.

“That’s not irony.”

As I went down-stairs I heard Bill singing, “Irony and Pity. When you’re
feeling . . . Oh, Give them Irony and Give them Pity. Oh, give them
Irony. When they’re feeling . . . Just a little irony. Just a little
pity . . .” He kept on singing until he came down-stairs. The tune was:
“The Bells are Ringing for Me and my Gal.” I was reading a week-old
Spanish paper.

“What’s all this irony and pity?”

“What? Don’t you know about Irony and Pity?”

“No. Who got it up?”

“Everybody. They’re mad about it in New York. It’s just like the
Fratellinis used to be.”

The girl came in with the coffee and buttered toast. Or, rather, it was
bread toasted and buttered.

“Ask her if she’s got any jam,” Bill said. “Be ironical with her.”

“Have you got any jam?”

“That’s not ironical. I wish I could talk Spanish.”

The coffee was good and we drank it out of big bowls. The girl brought
in a glass dish of raspberry jam.

“Thank you.”

“Hey! that’s not the way,” Bill said. “Say something ironical. Make some
crack about Primo de Rivera.”

“I could ask her what kind of a jam they think they’ve gotten into in
the Riff.”

“Poor,” said Bill. “Very poor. You can’t do it. That’s all. You don’t
understand irony. You have no pity. Say something pitiful.”

“Robert Cohn.”

“Not so bad. That’s better. Now why is Cohn pitiful? Be ironic.”

He took a big gulp of coffee.

“Aw, hell!” I said. “It’s too early in the morning.”

“There you go. And you claim you want to be a writer, too. You’re only a
newspaper man. An expatriated newspaper man. You ought to be ironical
the minute you get out of bed. You ought to wake up with your mouth full
of pity.”

“Go on,” I said. “Who did you get this stuff from?”

“Everybody. Don’t you read? Don’t you ever see anybody? You know what
you are? You’re an expatriate. Why don’t you live in New York? Then
you’d know these things. What do you want me to do? Come over here and
tell you every year?”

“Take some more coffee,” I said.

“Good. Coffee is good for you. It’s the caffeine in it. Caffeine, we are
here. Caffeine puts a man on her horse and a woman in his grave. You
know what’s the trouble with you? You’re an expatriate. One of the worst
type. Haven’t you heard that? Nobody that ever left their own country
ever wrote anything worth printing. Not even in the newspapers.”

He drank the coffee.

“You’re an expatriate. You’ve lost touch with the soil. You get
precious. Fake European standards have ruined you. You drink yourself to
death. You become obsessed by sex. You spend all your time talking, not
working. You are an expatriate, see? You hang around cafés.”

“It sounds like a swell life,” I said. “When do I work?”

“You don’t work. One group claims women support you. Another group
claims you’re impotent.”

“No,” I said. “I just had an accident.”

“Never mention that,” Bill said. “That’s the sort of thing that can’t be
spoken of. That’s what you ought to work up into a mystery. Like Henry’s
bicycle.”

He had been going splendidly, but he stopped. I was afraid he thought he
had hurt me with that crack about being impotent. I wanted to start him
again.

“It wasn’t a bicycle,” I said. “He was riding horseback.”

“I heard it was a tricycle.”

“Well,” I said. “A plane is sort of like a tricycle. The joystick works
the same way.”

“But you don’t pedal it.”

“No,” I said, “I guess you don’t pedal it.”

“Let’s lay off that,” Bill said.

“All right. I was just standing up for the tricycle.”

“I think he’s a good writer, too,” Bill said. “And you’re a hell of a
good guy. Anybody ever tell you you were a good guy?”

“I’m not a good guy.”

“Listen. You’re a hell of a good guy, and I’m fonder of you than anybody
on earth. I couldn’t tell you that in New York. It’d mean I was a
faggot. That was what the Civil War was about. Abraham Lincoln was a
faggot. He was in love with General Grant. So was Jefferson Davis.
Lincoln just freed the slaves on a bet. The Dred Scott case was framed
by the Anti-Saloon League. Sex explains it all. The Colonel’s Lady and
Judy O’Grady are Lesbians under their skin.”

He stopped.

“Want to hear some more?”

“Shoot,” I said.

“I don’t know any more. Tell you some more at lunch.”

“Old Bill,” I said.

“You bum!”

We packed the lunch and two bottles of wine in the rucksack, and Bill
put it on. I carried the rod-case and the landing-nets slung over my
back. We started up the road and then went across a meadow and found a
path that crossed the fields and went toward the woods on the slope of
the first hill. We walked across the fields on the sandy path. The
fields were rolling and grassy and the grass was short from the sheep
grazing. The cattle were up in the hills. We heard their bells in the
woods.

The path crossed a stream on a foot-log. The log was surfaced off, and
there was a sapling bent across for a rail. In the flat pool beside the
stream tadpoles spotted the sand. We went up a steep bank and across the
rolling fields. Looking back we saw Burguete, white houses and red
roofs, and the white road with a truck going along it and the dust
rising.

Beyond the fields we crossed another faster-flowing stream. A sandy road
led down to the ford and beyond into the woods. The path crossed the
stream on another foot-log below the ford, and joined the road, and we
went into the woods.

It was a beech wood and the trees were very old. Their roots bulked
above the ground and the branches were twisted. We walked on the road
between the thick trunks of the old beeches and the sunlight came
through the leaves in light patches on the grass. The trees were big,
and the foliage was thick but it was not gloomy. There was no
undergrowth, only the smooth grass, very green and fresh, and the big
gray trees well spaced as though it were a park.

“This is country,” Bill said.

The road went up a hill and we got into thick woods, and the road kept
on climbing. Sometimes it dipped down but rose again steeply. All the
time we heard the cattle in the woods. Finally, the road came out on the
top of the hills. We were on the top of the height of land that was the
highest part of the range of wooded hills we had seen from Burguete.
There were wild strawberries growing on the sunny side of the ridge in a
little clearing in the trees.

Ahead the road came out of the forest and went along the shoulder of the
ridge of hills. The hills ahead were not wooded, and there were great
fields of yellow gorse. Way off we saw the steep bluffs, dark with trees
and jutting with gray stone, that marked the course of the Irati River.

“We have to follow this road along the ridge, cross these hills, go
through the woods on the far hills, and come down to the Irati valley,”
I pointed out to Bill.

“That’s a hell of a hike.”

“It’s too far to go and fish and come back the same day, comfortably.”

“Comfortably. That’s a nice word. We’ll have to go like hell to get
there and back and have any fishing at all.”

It was a long walk and the country was very fine, but we were tired when
we came down the steep road that led out of the wooded hills into the
valley of the Rio de la Fabrica.

The road came out from the shadow of the woods into the hot sun. Ahead
was a river-valley. Beyond the river was a steep hill. There was a field
of buckwheat on the hill. We saw a white house under some trees on the
hillside. It was very hot and we stopped under some trees beside a dam
that crossed the river.

Bill put the pack against one of the trees and we jointed up the rods,
put on the reels, tied on leaders, and got ready to fish.

“You’re sure this thing has trout in it?” Bill asked.

“It’s full of them.”

“I’m going to fish a fly. You got any McGintys?”

“There’s some in there.”

“You going to fish bait?”

“Yeah. I’m going to fish the dam here.”

“Well, I’ll take the fly-book, then.” He tied on a fly. “Where’d I
better go? Up or down?”

“Down is the best. They’re plenty up above, too.”

Bill went down the bank.

“Take a worm can.”

“No, I don’t want one. If they won’t take a fly I’ll just flick it
around.”

Bill was down below watching the stream.

“Say,” he called up against the noise of the dam. “How about putting the
wine in that spring up the road?”

“All right,” I shouted. Bill waved his hand and started down the stream.
I found the two wine-bottles in the pack, and carried them up the road
to where the water of a spring flowed out of an iron pipe. There was a
board over the spring and I lifted it and, knocking the corks firmly
into the bottles, lowered them down into the water. It was so cold my
hand and wrist felt numbed. I put back the slab of wood, and hoped
nobody would find the wine.

I got my rod that was leaning against the tree, took the bait-can and
landing-net, and walked out onto the dam. It was built to provide a head
of water for driving logs. The gate was up, and I sat on one of the
squared timbers and watched the smooth apron of water before the river
tumbled into the falls. In the white water at the foot of the dam it was
deep. As I baited up, a trout shot up out of the white water into the
falls and was carried down. Before I could finish baiting, another trout
jumped at the falls, making the same lovely arc and disappearing into
the water that was thundering down. I put on a good-sized sinker and
dropped into the white water close to the edge of the timbers of the
dam.

I did not feel the first trout strike. When I started to pull up I felt
that I had one and brought him, fighting and bending the rod almost
double, out of the boiling water at the foot of the falls, and swung him
up and onto the dam. He was a good trout, and I banged his head against
the timber so that he quivered out straight, and then slipped him into
my bag.

While I had him on, several trout had jumped at the falls. As soon as I
baited up and dropped in again I hooked another and brought him in the
same way. In a little while I had six. They were all about the same
size. I laid them out, side by side, all their heads pointing the same
way, and looked at them. They were beautifully colored and firm and hard
from the cold water. It was a hot day, so I slit them all and shucked
out the insides, gills and all, and tossed them over across the river. I
took the trout ashore, washed them in the cold, smoothly heavy water
above the dam, and then picked some ferns and packed them all in the
bag, three trout on a layer of ferns, then another layer of fems, then
three more trout, and then covered them with ferns. They looked nice in
the ferns, and now the bag was bulky, and I put it in the shade of the
tree.

It was very hot on the dam, so I put my worm-can in the shade with the
bag, and got a book out of the pack and settled down under the tree to
read until Bill should come up for lunch.

It was a little past noon and there was not much shade, but I sat
against the trunk of two of the trees that grew together, and read. The
book was something by A. E. W. Mason, and I was reading a wonderful
story about a man who had been frozen in the Alps and then fallen into a
glacier and disappeared, and his bride was going to wait twenty-four
years exactly for his body to come out on the moraine, while her true
love waited too, and they were still waiting when Bill came up.

“Get any?” he asked. He had his rod and his bag and his net all in one
hand, and he was sweating. I hadn’t heard him come up, because of the
noise from the dam.

“Six. What did you get?”

Bill sat down, opened up his bag, laid a big trout on the grass. He took
out three more, each one a little bigger than the last, and laid them
side by side in the shade from the tree. His face was sweaty and happy.

“How are yours?”

“Smaller.”

“Let’s see them.”

“They’re packed.”

“How big are they really?”

“They’re all about the size of your smallest.”

“You’re not holding out on me?”

“I wish I were.”

“Get them all on worms?”

“Yes.”

“You lazy bum!”

Bill put the trout in the bag and started for the river, swinging the
open bag. He was wet from the waist down and I knew he must have been
wading the stream.

I walked up the road and got out the two bottles of wine. They were
cold. Moisture beaded on the bottles as I walked back to the trees. I
spread the lunch on a newspaper, and uncorked one of the bottles and
leaned the other against a tree. Bill came up drying his hands, his bag
plump with ferns.

“Let’s see that bottle,” he said. He pulled the cork, and tipped up the
bottle and drank. “Whew! That makes my eyes ache.”

“Let’s try it.”

The wine was icy cold and tasted faintly rusty.

“That’s not such filthy wine,” Bill said.

“The cold helps it,” I said.

We unwrapped the little parcels of lunch.

“Chicken.”

“There’s hard-boiled eggs.”

“Find any salt?”

“First the egg,” said Bill. “Then the chicken. Even Bryan could see
that.”

“He’s dead. I read it in the paper yesterday.”

“No. Not really?”

“Yes. Bryan’s dead.”

Bill laid down the egg he was peeling.

“Gentlemen,” he said, and unwrapped a drumstick from a piece of
newspaper. “I reverse the order. For Bryan’s sake. As a tribute to the
Great Commoner. First the chicken; then the egg.”

“Wonder what day God created the chicken?”

“Oh,” said Bill, sucking the drumstick, “how should we know? We should
not question. Our stay on earth is not for long. Let us rejoice and
believe and give thanks.”

“Eat an egg.”

Bill gestured with the drumstick in one hand and the bottle of wine in
the other.

“Let us rejoice in our blessings. Let us utilize the fowls of the air.
Let us utilize the product of the vine. Will you utilize a little,
brother?”

“After you, brother.”

Bill took a long drink.

“Utilize a little, brother,” he handed me the bottle. “Let us not doubt,
brother. Let us not pry into the holy mysteries of the hen-coop with
simian fingers. Let us accept on faith and simply say—I want you to
join with me in saying—What shall we say, brother?” He pointed the
drumstick at me and went on. “Let me tell you. We will say, and I for
one am proud to say—and I want you to say with me, on your knees,
brother. Let no man be ashamed to kneel here in the great out-of-doors.
Remember the woods were God’s first temples. Let us kneel and say:
‘Don’t eat that, Lady—that’s Mencken.’”

“Here,” I said. “Utilize a little of this.”

We uncorked the other bottle.

“What’s the matter?” I said. “Didn’t you like Bryan?”

“I loved Bryan,” said Bill. “We were like brothers.”

“Where did you know him?”

“He and Mencken and I all went to Holy Cross together.”

“And Frankie Fritsch.”

“It’s a lie. Frankie Fritsch went to Fordham.”

“Well,” I said, “I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning.”

“It’s a lie,” Bill said. “I went to Loyola with Bishop Manning myself.”

“You’re cock-eyed,” I said.

“On wine?”

“Why not?”

“It’s the humidity,” Bill said. “They ought to take this damn humidity
away.”

“Have another shot.”

“Is this all we’ve got?”

“Only the two bottles.”

“Do you know what you are?” Bill looked at the bottle affectionately.

“No,” I said.

“You’re in the pay of the Anti-Saloon League.”

“I went to Notre Dame with Wayne B. Wheeler.”

“It’s a lie,” said Bill. “I went to Austin Business College with Wayne
B. Wheeler. He was class president.”

“Well,” I said, “the saloon must go.”

“You’re right there, old classmate,” Bill said. “The saloon must go, and
I will take it with me.”

“You’re cock-eyed.”

“On wine?”

“On wine.”

“Well, maybe I am.”

“Want to take a nap?”

“All right.”

We lay with our heads in the shade and looked up into the trees.

“You asleep?”

“No,” Bill said. “I was thinking.”

I shut my eyes. It felt good lying on the ground.

“Say,” Bill said, “what about this Brett business?”

“What about it?”

“Were you ever in love with her?”

“Sure.”

“For how long?”

“Off and on for a hell of a long time.”

“Oh, hell!” Bill said. “I’m sorry, fella.”

“It’s all right,” I said. “I don’t give a damn any more.”

“Really?”

“Really. Only I’d a hell of a lot rather not talk about it.”

“You aren’t sore I asked you?”

“Why the hell should I be?”

“I’m going to sleep,” Bill said. He put a newspaper over his face.

“Listen, Jake,” he said, “are you really a Catholic?”

“Technically.”

“What does that mean?”

“I don’t know.”

“All right, I’ll go to sleep now,” he said. “Don’t keep me awake by
talking so much.”

I went to sleep, too. When I woke up Bill was packing the rucksack. It
was late in the afternoon and the shadow from the trees was long and
went out over the dam. I was stiff from sleeping on the ground.

“What did you do? Wake up?” Bill asked. “Why didn’t you spend the
night?” I stretched and rubbed my eyes.

“I had a lovely dream,” Bill said. “I don’t remember what it was about,
but it was a lovely dream.”

“I don’t think I dreamt.”

“You ought to dream,” Bill said. “All our biggest business men have been
dreamers. Look at Ford. Look at President Coolidge. Look at Rockefeller.
Look at Jo Davidson.”

I disjointed my rod and Bill’s and packed them in the rod-case. I put
the reels in the tackle-bag. Bill had packed the rucksack and we put one
of the trout-bags in. I carried the other.

“Well,” said Bill, “have we got everything?”

“The worms.”

“Your worms. Put them in there.”

He had the pack on his back and I put the worm-cans in one of the
outside flap pockets.

“You got everything now?”

I looked around on the grass at the foot of the elm-trees.

“Yes.”

We started up the road into the woods. It was a long walk home to
Burguete, and it was dark when we came down across the fields to the
road, and along the road between the houses of the town, their windows
lighted, to the inn.

We stayed five days at Burguete and had good fishing. The nights were
cold and the days were hot, and there was always a breeze even in the
heat of the day. It was hot enough so that it felt good to wade in a
cold stream, and the sun dried you when you came out and sat on the
bank. We found a stream with a pool deep enough to swim in. In the
evenings we played three-handed bridge with an Englishman named Harris,
who had walked over from Saint Jean Pied de Port and was stopping at the
inn for the fishing. He was very pleasant and went with us twice to the
Irati River. There was no word from Robert Cohn nor from Brett and Mike.




                                CHAPTER
                                   13


One morning I went down to breakfast and the Englishman, Harris, was
already at the table. He was reading the paper through spectacles. He
looked up and smiled.

“Good morning,” he said. “Letter for you. I stopped at the post and they
gave it me with mine.”

The letter was at my place at the table, leaning against a coffee-cup.
Harris was reading the paper again. I opened the letter. It had been
forwarded from Pamplona. It was dated San Sebastian, Sunday:

    DEAR JAKE,

    We got here Friday, Brett passed out on the train, so brought
    her here for 3 days rest with old friends of ours. We go to
    Montoya Hotel Pamplona Tuesday, arriving at I don’t know what
    hour. Will you send a note by the bus to tell us what to do to
    rejoin you all on Wednesday. All our love and sorry to be late,
    but Brett was really done in and will be quite all right by
    Tues. and is practically so now. I know her so well and try to
    look after her but it’s not so easy. Love to all the chaps,

                                                          MICHAEL.

“What day of the week is it?” I asked Harris.

“Wednesday, I think. Yes, quite. Wednesday. Wonderful how one loses
track of the days up here in the mountains.”

“Yes. We’ve been here nearly a week.”

“I hope you’re not thinking of leaving?”

“Yes. We’ll go in on the afternoon bus, I’m afraid.”

“What a rotten business. I had hoped we’d all have another go at the
Irati together.”

“We have to go _into_ Pamplona. We’re meeting people there.”

“What rotten luck for me. We’ve had a jolly time here at Burguete.”

“Come on in to Pamplona. We can play some bridge there, and there’s
going to be a damned fine fiesta.”

“I’d like to. Awfully nice of you to ask me. I’d best stop on here,
though. I’ve not much more time to fish.”

“You want those big ones in the Irati.”

“I say, I do, you know. They’re enormous trout there.”

“I’d like to try them once more.”

“Do. Stop over another day. Be a good chap.”

“We really have to get into town,” I said.

“What a pity.”

After breakfast Bill and I were sitting warming in the sun on a bench
out in front of the inn and talking it over. I saw a girl coming up the
road from the centre of the town. She stopped in front of us and took a
telegram out of the leather wallet that hung against her skirt.

“Por ustedes?”

I looked at it. The address was: “Barnes, Burguete.”

“Yes. It’s for us.”

She brought out a book for me to sign, and I gave her a couple of
coppers. The telegram was in Spanish: “Vengo Jueves Cohn.”

I handed it to Bill.

“What does the word Cohn mean?” he asked.

“What a lousy telegram!” I said. “He could send ten words for the same
price. ‘I come Thursday.’ That gives you a lot of dope, doesn’t it?”

“It gives you all the dope that’s of interest to Cohn.”

“We’re going in, anyway,” I said. “There’s no use trying to move Brett
and Mike out here and back before the fiesta. Should we answer it?”

“We might as well,” said Bill. “There’s no need for us to be snooty.”

We walked up to the post-office and asked for a telegraph blank.

“What will we say?” Bill asked.

“‘Arriving to-night.’ That’s enough.”

We paid for the message and walked back to the inn. Harris was there and
the three of us walked up to Roncesvalles. We went through the
monastery.

“It’s a remarkable place,” Harris said, when we came out. “But you know
I’m not much on those sort of places.”

“Me either,” Bill said.

“It’s a remarkable place, though,” Harris said. “I wouldn’t not have
seen it. I’d been intending coming up each day.”

“It isn’t the same as fishing, though, is it?” Bill asked. He liked
Harris.

“I say not.”

We were standing in front of the old chapel of the monastery.

“Isn’t that a pub across the way?” Harris asked. “Or do my eyes deceive
me?”

“It has the look of a pub,” Bill said.

“It looks to me like a pub,” I said.

“I say,” said Harris, “let’s utilize it.” He had taken up utilizing from
Bill.

We had a bottle of wine apiece. Harris would not let us pay. He talked
Spanish quite well, and the innkeeper would not take our money.

“I say. You don’t know what it’s meant to me to have you chaps up here.”

“We’ve had a grand time, Harris.”

Harris was a little tight.

“I say. Really you don’t know how much it means. I’ve not had much fun
since the war.”

“We’ll fish together again, some time. Don’t you forget it, Harris.”

“We must. We _have_ had such a jolly good time.”

“How about another bottle around?”

“Jolly good idea,” said Harris.

“This is mine,” said Bill. “Or we don’t drink it.”

“I wish you’d let me pay for it. It _does_ give me pleasure, you know.”

“This is going to give me pleasure,” Bill said.

The innkeeper brought in the fourth bottle. We had kept the same
glasses. Harris lifted his glass.

“I say. You know this does utilize well.”

Bill slapped him on the back.

“Good old Harris.”

“I say. You know my name isn’t really Harris. It’s Wilson-Harris. All
one name. With a hyphen, you know.”

“Good old Wilson-Harris,” Bill said. “We call you Harris because we’re
so fond of you.”

“I say, Barnes. You don’t know what this all means to me.”

“Come on and utilize another glass,” I said.

“Barnes. Really, Barnes, you can’t know. That’s all.”

“Drink up, Harris.”

We walked back down the road from Roncesvalles with Harris between us.
We had lunch at the inn and Harris went with us to the bus. He gave us
his card, with his address in London and his club and his business
address, and as we got on the bus he handed us each an envelope. I
opened mine and there were a dozen flies in it. Harris had tied them
himself. He tied all his own flies.

“I say, Harris—” I began.

“No, no!” he said. He was climbing down from the bus. “They’re not
first-rate flies at all. I only thought if you fished them some time it
might remind you of what a good time we had.”

The bus started. Harris stood in front of the post-office. He waved. As
we started along the road he turned and walked back toward the inn.

“Say, wasn’t that Harris nice?” Bill said.

“I think he really did have a good time.”

“Harris? You bet he did.”

“I wish he’d come into Pamplona.”

“He wanted to fish.”

“Yes. You couldn’t tell how English would mix with each other, anyway.”

“I suppose not.”

We got into Pamplona late in the afternoon and the bus stopped in front
of the Hotel Montoya. Out in the plaza they were stringing
electric-light wires to light the plaza for the fiesta. A few kids came
up when the bus stopped, and a customs officer for the town made all the
people getting down from the bus open their bundles on the sidewalk. We
went into the hotel and on the stairs I met Montoya. He shook hands with
us, smiling in his embarrassed way.

“Your friends are here,” he said.

“Mr. Campbell?”

“Yes. Mr. Cohn and Mr. Campbell and Lady Ashley.”

He smiled as though there were something I would hear about.

“When did they get in?”

“Yesterday. I’ve saved you the rooms you had.”

“That’s fine. Did you give Mr. Campbell the room on the plaza?”

“Yes. All the rooms we looked at.”

“Where are our friends now?”

“I think they went to the pelota.”

“And how about the bulls?”

Montoya smiled. “To-night,” he said. “To-night at seven o’clock they
bring in the Villar bulls, and to-morrow come the Miuras. Do you all go
down?”

“Oh, yes. They’ve never seen a desencajonada.”

Montoya put his hand on my shoulder.

“I’ll see you there.”

He smiled again. He always smiled as though bull-fighting were a very
special secret between the two of us; a rather shocking but really very
deep secret that we knew about. He always smiled as though there were
something lewd about the secret to outsiders, but that it was something
that we understood. It would not do to expose it to people who would not
understand.

“Your friend, is he aficionado, too?” Montoya smiled at Bill.

“Yes. He came all the way from New York to see the San Fermines.”

“Yes?” Montoya politely disbelieved. “But he’s not aficionado like you.”

He put his hand on my shoulder again embarrassedly.

“Yes,” I said. “He’s a real aficionado.”

“But he’s not aficionado like you are.”

Aficion means passion. An aficionado is one who is passionate about the
bull-fights. All the good bull-fighters stayed at Montoya’s hotel; that
is, those with aficion stayed there. The commercial bull-fighters stayed
once, perhaps, and then did not come back. The good ones came each year.
In Montoya’s room were their photographs. The photographs were dedicated
to Juanito Montoya or to his sister. The photographs of bull-fighters
Montoya had really believed in were framed. Photographs of bull-fighters
who had been without aficion Montoya kept in a drawer of his desk. They
often had the most flattering inscriptions. But they did not mean
anything. One day Montoya took them all out and dropped them in the
waste-basket. He did not want them around.

We often talked about bulls and bull-fighters. I had stopped at the
Montoya for several years. We never talked for very long at a time. It
was simply the pleasure of discovering what we each felt. Men would come
in from distant towns and before they left Pamplona stop and talk for a
few minutes with Montoya about bulls. These men were aficionados. Those
who were aficionados could always get rooms even when the hotel was
full. Montoya introduced me to some of them. They were always very
polite at first, and it amused them very much that I should be an
American. Somehow it was taken for granted that an American could not
have aficion. He might simulate it or confuse it with excitement, but he
could not really have it. When they saw that I had aficion, and there
was no password, no set questions that could bring it out, rather it was
a sort of oral spiritual examination with the questions always a little
on the defensive and never apparent, there was this same embarrassed
putting the hand on the shoulder, or a “Buen hombre.” But nearly always
there was the actual touching. It seemed as though they wanted to touch
you to make it certain.

Montoya could forgive anything of a bull-fighter who had aficion. He
could forgive attacks of nerves, panic, bad unexplainable actions, all
sorts of lapses. For one who had aficion he could forgive anything. At
once he forgave me all my friends. Without his ever saying anything they
were simply a little something shameful between us, like the spilling
open of the horses in bull-fighting.

Bill had gone up-stairs as we came in, and I found him washing and
changing in his room.

“Well,” he said, “talk a lot of Spanish?”

“He was telling me about the bulls coming in to-night.”

“Let’s find the gang and go down.”

“All right. They’ll probably be at the café.”

“Have you got tickets?”

“Yes. I got them for all the unloadings.”

“What’s it like?” He was pulling his cheek before the glass, looking to
see if there were unshaved patches under the line of the jaw.

“It’s pretty good,” I said. “They let the bulls out of the cages one at
a time, and they have steers in the corral to receive them and keep them
from fighting, and the bulls tear in at the steers and the steers run
around like old maids trying to quiet them down.”

“Do they ever gore the steers?”

“Sure. Sometimes they go right after them and kill them.”

“Can’t the steers do anything?”

“No. They’re trying to make friends.”

“What do they have them in for?”

“To quiet down the bulls and keep them from breaking horns against the
stone walls, or goring each other.”

“Must be swell being a steer.”

We went down the stairs and out of the door and walked across the square
toward the Café Iruña. There were two lonely looking ticket-houses
standing in the square. Their windows, marked SOL, SOL Y SOMBRA, and
SOMBRA, were shut. They would not open until the day before the fiesta.

Across the square the white wicker tables and chairs of the Iruña
extended out beyond the Arcade to the edge of the street. I looked for
Brett and Mike at the tables. There they were. Brett and Mike and Robert
Cohn. Brett was wearing a Basque beret. So was Mike. Robert Cohn was
bare-headed and wearing his spectacles. Brett saw us coming and waved.
Her eyes crinkled up as we came up to the table.

“Hello, you chaps!” she called.

Brett was happy. Mike had a way of getting an intensity of feeling into
shaking hands. Robert Cohn shook hands because we were back.

“Where the hell have you been?” I asked.

“I brought them up here,” Cohn said.

“What rot,” Brett said. “We’d have gotten here earlier if you hadn’t
come.”

“You’d never have gotten here.”

“What rot! You chaps are brown. Look at Bill.”

“Did you get good fishing?” Mike asked. “We wanted to join you.”

“It wasn’t bad. We missed you.”

“I wanted to come,” Cohn said, “but I thought I ought to bring them.”

“You bring us. What rot.”

“Was it really good?” Mike asked. “Did you take many?”

“Some days we took a dozen apiece. There was an Englishman up there.”

“Named Harris,” Bill said. “Ever know him, Mike? He was in the war,
too.”

“Fortunate fellow,” Mike said. “What times we had. How I wish those dear
days were back.”

“Don’t be an ass.”

“Were you in the war, Mike?” Cohn asked.

“Was I not.”

“He was a very distinguished soldier,” Brett said. “Tell them about the
time your horse bolted down Piccadilly.”

“I’ll not. I’ve told that four times.”

“You never told me,” Robert Cohn said.

“I’ll not tell that story. It reflects discredit on me.”

“Tell them about your medals.”

“I’ll not. That story reflects great discredit on me.”

“What story’s that?”

“Brett will tell you. She tells all the stories that reflect discredit
on me.”

“Go on. Tell it, Brett.”

“Should I?”

“I’ll tell it myself.”

“What medals have you got, Mike?”

“I haven’t got any medals.”

“You must have some.”

“I suppose I’ve the usual medals. But I never sent in for them. One time
there was this wopping big dinner and the Prince of Wales was to be
there, and the cards said medals will be worn. So naturally I had no
medals, and I stopped at my tailor’s and he was impressed by the
invitation, and I thought that’s a good piece of business, and I said to
him: ‘You’ve got to fix me up with some medals.’ He said: ‘What medals,
sir?’ And I said: ‘Oh, any medals. Just give me a few medals.’ So he
said: ‘What medals _have_ you, sir?’ And I said: ‘How should I know?’
Did he think I spent all my time reading the bloody gazette? ‘Just give
me a good lot. Pick them out yourself.’ So he got me some medals, you
know, miniature medals, and handed me the box, and I put it in my pocket
and forgot it. Well, I went to the dinner, and it was the night they’d
shot Henry Wilson, so the Prince didn’t come and the King didn’t come,
and no one wore any medals, and all these coves were busy taking off
their medals, and I had mine in my pocket.”

He stopped for us to laugh.

“Is that all?”

“That’s all. Perhaps I didn’t tell it right.”

“You didn’t,” said Brett. “But no matter.”

We were all laughing.

“Ah, yes,” said Mike. “I know now. It was a damn dull dinner, and I
couldn’t stick it, so I left. Later on in the evening I found the box in
my pocket. What’s this? I said. Medals? Bloody military medals? So I cut
them all off their backing—you know, they put them on a strip—and gave
them all around. Gave one to each girl. Form of souvenir. They thought I
was hell’s own shakes of a soldier. Give away medals in a night club.
Dashing fellow.”

“Tell the rest,” Brett said.

“Don’t you think that was funny?” Mike asked. We were all laughing. “It
was. I swear it was. Any rate, my tailor wrote me and wanted the medals
back. Sent a man around. Kept on writing for months. Seems some chap had
left them to be cleaned. Frightfully military cove. Set hell’s own store
by them.” Mike paused. “Rotten luck for the tailor,” he said.

“You don’t mean it,” Bill said. “I should think it would have been grand
for the tailor.”

“Frightfully good tailor. Never believe it to see me now,” Mike said. “I
used to pay him a hundred pounds a year just to keep him quiet. So he
wouldn’t send me any bills. Frightful blow to him when I went bankrupt.
It was right after the medals. Gave his letters rather a bitter tone.”

“How did you go bankrupt?” Bill asked.

“Two ways,” Mike said. “Gradually and then suddenly.”

“What brought it on?”

“Friends,” said Mike. “I had a lot of friends. False friends. Then I had
creditors, too. Probably had more creditors than anybody in England.”

“Tell them about in the court,” Brett said.

“I don’t remember,” Mike said. “I was just a little tight.”

“Tight!” Brett exclaimed. “You were blind!”

“Extraordinary thing,” Mike said. “Met my former partner the other day.
Offered to buy me a drink.”

“Tell them about your learned counsel,” Brett said.

“I will not,” Mike said. “My learned counsel was blind, too. I say this
is a gloomy subject. Are we going down and see these bulls unloaded or
not?”

“Let’s go down.”

We called the waiter, paid, and started to walk through the town. I
started off walking with Brett, but Robert Cohn came up and joined her
on the other side. The three of us walked along, past the Ayuntamiento
with the banners hung from the balcony, down past the market and down
past the steep street that led to the bridge across the Arga. There were
many people walking to go and see the bulls, and carriages drove down
the hill and across the bridge, the drivers, the horses, and the whips
rising above the walking people in the street. Across the bridge we
turned up a road to the corrals. We passed a wine-shop with a sign in
the window: Good Wine 30 Centimes A Liter.

“That’s where we’ll go when funds get low,” Brett said.

The woman standing in the door of the wine-shop looked at us as we
passed. She called to some one in the house and three girls came to the
window and stared. They were staring at Brett.

At the gate of the corrals two men took tickets from the people that
went in. We went in through the gate. There were trees inside and a low,
stone house. At the far end was the stone wall of the corrals, with
apertures in the stone that were like loopholes running all along the
face of each corral. A ladder led up to the top of the wall, and people
were climbing up the ladder and spreading down to stand on the walls
that separated the two corrals. As we came up the ladder, walking across
the grass under the trees, we passed the big, gray painted cages with
the bulls in them. There was one bull in each travelling-box. They had
come by train from a bull-breeding ranch in Castile, and had been
unloaded off flat-cars at the station and brought up here to be let out
of their cages into the corrals. Each cage was stencilled with the name
and the brand of the bull-breeder.

We climbed up and found a place on the wall looking down into the
corral. The stone walls were whitewashed, and there was straw on the
ground and wooden feed-boxes and water-troughs set against the wall.

“Look up there,” I said.

Beyond the river rose the plateau of the town. All along the old walls
and ramparts people were standing. The three lines of fortifications
made three black lines of people. Above the walls there were heads in
the windows of the houses. At the far end of the plateau boys had
climbed into the trees.

“They must think something is going to happen,” Brett said.

“They want to see the bulls.”

Mike and Bill were on the other wall across the pit of the corral. They
waved to us. People who had come late were standing behind us, pressing
against us when other people crowded them.

“Why don’t they start?” Robert Cohn asked.

A single mule was hitched to one of the cages and dragged it up against
the gate in the corral wall. The men shoved and lifted it with crowbars
into position against the gate. Men were standing on the wall ready to
pull up the gate of the corral and then the gate of the cage. At the
other end of the corral a gate opened and two steers came in, swaying
their heads and trotting, their lean flanks swinging. They stood
together at the far end, their heads toward the gate where the bull
would enter.

“They don’t look happy,” Brett said.

The men on top of the wall leaned back and pulled up the door of the
corral. Then they pulled up the door of the cage.

I leaned way over the wall and tried to see into the cage. It was dark.
Some one rapped on the cage with an iron bar. Inside something seemed to
explode. The bull, striking into the wood from side to side with his
horns, made a great noise. Then I saw a dark muzzle and the shadow of
horns, and then, with a clattering on the wood in the hollow box, the
bull charged and came out into the corral, skidding with his forefeet in
the straw as he stopped, his head up, the great hump of muscle on his
neck swollen tight, his body muscles quivering as he looked up at the
crowd on the stone walls. The two steers backed away against the wall,
their heads sunken, their eyes watching the bull.

The bull saw them and charged. A man shouted from behind one of the
boxes and slapped his hat against the planks, and the bull, before he
reached the steer, turned, gathered himself and charged where the man
had been, trying to reach him behind the planks with a half-dozen quick,
searching drives with the right horn.

“My God, isn’t he beautiful?” Brett said. We were looking right down on
him.

“Look how he knows how to use his horns,” I said. “He’s got a left and a
right just like a boxer.”

“Not really?”

“You watch.”

“It goes too fast.”

“Wait. There’ll be another one in a minute.”

They had backed up another cage into the entrance. In the far corner a
man, from behind one of the plank shelters, attracted the bull, and
while the bull was facing away the gate was pulled up and a second bull
came out into the corral.

He charged straight for the steers and two men ran out from behind the
planks and shouted, to turn him. He did not change his direction and the
men shouted: “Hah! Hah! Toro!” and waved their arms; the two steers
turned sideways to take the shock, and the bull drove into one of the
steers.

“Don’t look,” I said to Brett. She was watching, fascinated.

“Fine,” I said. “If it doesn’t buck you.”

“I saw it,” she said. “I saw him shift from his left to his right horn.”

“Damn good!”

The steer was down now, his neck stretched out, his head twisted, he lay
the way he had fallen. Suddenly the bull left off and made for the other
steer which had been standing at the far end, his head swinging,
watching it all. The steer ran awkwardly and the bull caught him, hooked
him lightly in the flank, and then turned away and looked up at the
crowd on the walls, his crest of muscle rising. The steer came up to him
and made as though to nose at him and the bull hooked perfunctorily. The
next time he nosed at the steer and then the two of them trotted over to
the other bull.

When the next bull came out, all three, the two bulls and the steer,
stood together, their heads side by side, their horns against the
newcomer. In a few minutes the steer picked the new bull up, quieted him
down, and made him one of the herd. When the last two bulls had been
unloaded the herd were all together.

The steer who had been gored had gotten to his feet and stood against
the stone wall. None of the bulls came near him, and he did not attempt
to join the herd.

We climbed down from the wall with the crowd, and had a last look at the
bulls through the loopholes in the wall of the corral. They were all
quiet now, their heads down. We got a carriage outside and rode up to
the café. Mike and Bill came in half an hour later. They had stopped on
the way for several drinks.

We were sitting in the café.

“That’s an extraordinary business,” Brett said.

“Will those last ones fight as well as the first?” Robert Cohn asked.
“They seemed to quiet down awfully fast.”

“They all know each other,” I said. “They’re only dangerous when they’re
alone, or only two or three of them together.”

“What do you mean, dangerous?” Bill said. “They all looked dangerous to
me.”

“They only want to kill when they’re alone. Of course, if you went in
there you’d probably detach one of them from the herd, and he’d be
dangerous.”

“That’s too complicated,” Bill said. “Don’t you ever detach me from the
herd, Mike.”

“I say,” Mike said, “they _were_ fine bulls, weren’t they? Did you see
their horns?”

“Did I not,” said Brett. “I had no idea what they were like.”

“Did you see the one hit that steer?” Mike asked. “That was
extraordinary.”

“It’s no life being a steer,” Robert Cohn said.

“Don’t you think so?” Mike said. “I would have thought you’d loved being
a steer, Robert.”

“What do you mean, Mike?”

“They lead such a quiet life. They never say anything and they’re always
hanging about so.”

We were embarrassed. Bill laughed. Robert Cohn was angry. Mike went on
talking.

“I should think you’d love it. You’d never have to say a word. Come on,
Robert. Do say something. Don’t just sit there.”

“I said something, Mike. Don’t you remember? About the steers.”

“Oh, say something more. Say something funny. Can’t you see we’re all
having a good time here?”

“Come off it, Michael. You’re drunk,” Brett said.

“I’m not drunk. I’m quite serious. _Is_ Robert Cohn going to follow
Brett around like a steer all the time?”

“Shut up, Michael. Try and show a little breeding.”

“Breeding be damned. Who has any breeding, anyway, except the bulls?
Aren’t the bulls lovely? Don’t you like them, Bill? Why don’t you say
something, Robert? Don’t sit there looking like a bloody funeral. What
if Brett did sleep with you? She’s slept with lots of better people than
you.”

“Shut up,” Cohn said. He stood up. “Shut up, Mike.”

“Oh, don’t stand up and act as though you were going to hit me. That
won’t make any difference to me. Tell me, Robert. Why do you follow
Brett around like a poor bloody steer? Don’t you know you’re not wanted?
I know when I’m not wanted. Why don’t you know when you’re not wanted?
You came down to San Sebastian where you weren’t wanted, and followed
Brett around like a bloody steer. Do you think that’s right?”

“Shut up. You’re drunk.”

“Perhaps I am drunk. Why aren’t you drunk? Why don’t you ever get drunk,
Robert? You know you didn’t have a good time at San Sebastian because
none of our friends would invite you on any of the parties. You can’t
blame them hardly. Can you? I asked them to. They wouldn’t do it. You
can’t blame them, now. Can you? Now, answer me. Can you blame them?”

“Go to hell, Mike.”

“I can’t blame them. Can you blame them? Why do you follow Brett around?
Haven’t you any manners? How do you think it makes _me_ feel?”

“You’re a splendid one to talk about manners,” Brett said. “You’ve such
lovely manners.”

“Come on, Robert,” Bill said.

“What do you follow her around for?”

Bill stood up and took hold of Cohn.

“Don’t go,” Mike said. “Robert Cohn’s going to buy a drink.”

Bill went off with Cohn. Cohn’s face was sallow. Mike went on talking. I
sat and listened for a while. Brett looked disgusted.

“I say, Michael, you might not be such a bloody ass,” she interrupted.
“I’m not saying he’s not right, you know.” She turned to me.

The emotion left Mike’s voice. We were all friends together.

“I’m not so damn drunk as I sounded,” he said.

“I know you’re not,” Brett said.

“We’re none of us sober,” I said.

“I didn’t say anything I didn’t mean.”

“But you put it so badly,” Brett laughed.

“He was an ass, though. He came down to San Sebastian where he damn well
wasn’t wanted. He hung around Brett and just _looked_ at her. It made me
damned well sick.”

“He did behave very badly,” Brett said.

“Mark you. Brett’s had affairs with men before. She tells me all about
everything. She gave me this chap Cohn’s letters to read. I wouldn’t
read them.”

“Damned noble of you.”

“No, listen, Jake. Brett’s gone off with men. But they weren’t ever
Jews, and they didn’t come and hang about afterward.”

“Damned good chaps,” Brett said. “It’s all rot to talk about it. Michael
and I understand each other.”

“She gave me Robert Cohn’s letters. I wouldn’t read them.”

“You wouldn’t read any letters, darling. You wouldn’t read mine.”

“I can’t read letters,” Mike said. “Funny, isn’t it?”

“You can’t read anything.”

“No. You’re wrong there. I read quite a bit. I read when I’m at home.”

“You’ll be writing next,” Brett said. “Come on, Michael. Do buck up.
You’ve got to go through with this thing now. He’s here. Don’t spoil the
fiesta.”

“Well, let him behave, then.”

“He’ll behave. I’ll tell him.”

“You tell him, Jake. Tell him either he must behave or get out.”

“Yes,” I said, “it would be nice for me to tell him.”

“Look, Brett. Tell Jake what Robert calls you. That is perfect, you
know.”

“Oh, no. I can’t.”

“Go on. We’re all friends. Aren’t we all friends, Jake?”

“I can’t tell him. It’s too ridiculous.”

“I’ll tell him.”

“You won’t, Michael. Don’t be an ass.”

“He calls her Circe,” Mike said. “He claims she turns men into swine.
Damn good. I wish I were one of these literary chaps.”

“He’d be good, you know,” Brett said. “He writes a good letter.”

“I know,” I said. “He wrote me from San Sebastian.”

“That was nothing,” Brett said. “He can write a damned amusing letter.”

“She made me write that. She was supposed to be ill.”

“I damned well was, too.”

“Come on,” I said, “we must go in and eat.”

“How should I meet Cohn?” Mike said.

“Just act as though nothing had happened.”

“It’s quite all right with me,” Mike said. “I’m not embarrassed.”

“If he says anything, just say you were tight.”

“Quite. And the funny thing is I think I was tight.”

“Come on,” Brett said. “Are these poisonous things paid for? I must
bathe before dinner.”

We walked across the square. It was dark and all around the square were
the lights from the cafés under the arcades. We walked across the gravel
under the trees to the hotel.

They went up-stairs and I stopped to speak with Montoya.

“Well, how did you like the bulls?” he asked.

“Good. They were nice bulls.”

“They’re all right”—Montoya shook his head—“but they’re not too good.”

“What didn’t you like about them?”

“I don’t know. They just didn’t give me the feeling that they were so
good.”

“I know what you mean.”

“They’re all right.”

“Yes. They’re all right.”

“How did your friends like them?”

“Fine.”

“Good,” Montoya said.

I went up-stairs. Bill was in his room standing on the balcony looking
out at the square. I stood beside him.

“Where’s Cohn?”

“Up-stairs in his room.”

“How does he feel?”

“Like hell, naturally. Mike was awful. He’s terrible when he’s tight.”

“He wasn’t so tight.”

“The hell he wasn’t. I know what we had before we came to the café.”

“He sobered up afterward.”

“Good. He was terrible. I don’t like Cohn, God knows, and I think it was
a silly trick for him to go down to San Sebastian, but nobody has any
business to talk like Mike.”

“How’d you like the bulls?”

“Grand. It’s grand the way they bring them out.”

“To-morrow come the Miuras.”

“When does the fiesta start?”

“Day after to-morrow.”

“We’ve got to keep Mike from getting so tight. That kind of stuff is
terrible.”

“We’d better get cleaned up for supper.”

“Yes. That will be a pleasant meal.”

“Won’t it?”

As a matter of fact, supper was a pleasant meal. Brett wore a black,
sleeveless evening dress. She looked quite beautiful. Mike acted as
though nothing had happened. I had to go up and bring Robert Cohn down.
He was reserved and formal, and his face was still taut and sallow, but
he cheered up finally. He could not stop looking at Brett. It seemed to
make him happy. It must have been pleasant for him to see her looking so
lovely, and know he had been away with her and that every one knew it.
They could not take that away from him. Bill was very funny. So was
Michael. They were good together.

It was like certain dinners I remember from the war. There was much
wine, an ignored tension, and a feeling of things coming that you could
not prevent happening. Under the wine I lost the disgusted feeling and
was happy. It seemed they were all such nice people.




                                CHAPTER
                                   14


I do not know what time I got to bed. I remember undressing, putting on
a bathrobe, and standing out on the balcony. I knew I was quite drunk,
and when I came in I put on the light over the head of the bed and
started to read. I was reading a book by Turgenieff. Probably I read the
same two pages over several times. It was one of the stories in “A
Sportsman’s Sketches.” I had read it before, but it seemed quite new.
The country became very clear and the feeling of pressure in my head
seemed to loosen. I was very drunk and I did not want to shut my eyes
because the room would go round and round. If I kept on reading that
feeling would pass.

I heard Brett and Robert Cohn come up the stairs. Cohn said good night
outside the door and went on up to his room. I heard Brett go into the
room next door. Mike was already in bed. He had come in with me an hour
before. He woke as she came in, and they talked together. I heard them
laugh. I turned off the light and tried to go to sleep. It was not
necessary to read any more. I could shut my eyes without getting the
wheeling sensation. But I could not sleep. There is no reason why
because it is dark you should look at things differently from when it is
light. The hell there isn’t!

I figured that all out once, and for six months I never slept with the
electric light off. That was another bright idea. To hell with women,
anyway. To hell with you, Brett Ashley.

Women made such swell friends. Awfully swell. In the first place, you
had to be in love with a woman to have a basis of friendship. I had been
having Brett for a friend. I had not been thinking about her side of it.
I had been getting something for nothing. That only delayed the
presentation of the bill. The bill always came. That was one of the
swell things you could count on.

I thought I had paid for everything. Not like the woman pays and pays
and pays. No idea of retribution or punishment. Just exchange of values.
You gave up something and got something else. Or you worked for
something. You paid some way for everything that was any good. I paid my
way into enough things that I liked, so that I had a good time. Either
you paid by learning about them, or by experience, or by taking chances,
or by money. Enjoying living was learning to get your money’s worth and
knowing when you had it. You could get your money’s worth. The world was
a good place to buy in. It seemed like a fine philosophy. In five years,
I thought, it will seem just as silly as all the other fine philosophies
I’ve had.

Perhaps that wasn’t true, though. Perhaps as you went along you did
learn something. I did not care what it was all about. All I wanted to
know was how to live in it. Maybe if you found out how to live in it you
learned from that what it was all about.

I wished Mike would not behave so terribly to Cohn, though. Mike was a
bad drunk. Brett was a good drunk. Bill was a good drunk. Cohn was never
drunk. Mike was unpleasant after he passed a certain point. I liked to
see him hurt Cohn. I wished he would not do it, though, because
afterward it made me disgusted at myself. That was morality; things that
made you disgusted afterward. No, that must be immorality. That was a
large statement. What a lot of bilge I could think up at night. What
rot, I could hear Brett say it. What rot! When you were with English you
got into the habit of using English expressions in your thinking. The
English spoken language—the upper classes, anyway—must have fewer
words than the Eskimo. Of course I didn’t know anything about the
Eskimo. Maybe the Eskimo was a fine language. Say the Cherokee. I didn’t
know anything about the Cherokee, either. The English talked with
inflected phrases. One phrase to mean everything. I liked them, though.
I liked the way they talked. Take Harris. Still Harris was not the upper
classes.

I turned on the light again and read. I read the Turgenieff. I knew that
now, reading it in the oversensitized state of my mind after much too
much brandy, I would remember it somewhere, and afterward it would seem
as though it had really happened to me. I would always have it. That was
another good thing you paid for and then had. Some time along toward
daylight I went to sleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The next two days in Pamplona were quiet, and there were no more rows.
The town was getting ready for the fiesta. Workmen put up the gate-posts
that were to shut off the side streets when the bulls were released from
the corrals and came running through the streets in the morning on their
way to the ring. The workmen dug holes and fitted in the timbers, each
timber numbered for its regular place. Out on the plateau beyond the
town employees of the bull-ring exercised picador horses, galloping them
stiff-legged on the hard, sun-baked fields behind the bull-ring. The big
gate of the bull-ring was open, and inside the amphitheatre was being
swept. The ring was rolled and sprinkled, and carpenters replaced
weakened or cracked planks in the barrera. Standing at the edge of the
smooth rolled sand you could look up in the empty stands and see old
women sweeping out the boxes.

Outside, the fence that led from the last street of the town to the
entrance of the bull-ring was already in place and made a long pen; the
crowd would come running down with the bulls behind them on the morning
of the day of the first bull-fight. Out across the plain, where the
horse and cattle fair would be, some gypsies had camped under the trees.
The wine and aguardiente sellers were putting up their booths. One booth
advertised =ANIS DEL TORO=. The cloth sign hung against the
planks in the hot sun. In the big square that was the centre of the town
there was no change yet. We sat in the white wicker chairs on the
terrasse of the café and watched the motor-buses come in and unload
peasants from the country coming in to the market, and we watched the
buses fill up and start out with peasants sitting with their saddle-bags
full of the things they had bought in the town. The tall gray
motor-buses were the only life of the square except for the pigeons and
the man with a hose who sprinkled the gravelled square and watered the
streets.

In the evening was the paseo. For an hour after dinner every one, all
the good-looking girls, the officers from the garrison, all the
fashionable people of the town, walked in the street on one side of the
square while the café tables filled with the regular after-dinner crowd.

During the morning I usually sat in the café and read the Madrid papers
and then walked in the town or out into the country. Sometimes Bill went
along. Sometimes he wrote in his room. Robert Cohn spent the mornings
studying Spanish or trying to get a shave at the barber-shop. Brett and
Mike never got up until noon. We all had a vermouth at the café. It was
a quiet life and no one was drunk. I went to church a couple of times,
once with Brett. She said she wanted to hear me go to confession, but I
told her that not only was it impossible but it was not as interesting
as it sounded, and, besides, it would be in a language she did not know.
We met Cohn as we came out of church, and although it was obvious he had
followed us, yet he was very pleasant and nice, and we all three went
for a walk out to the gypsy camp, and Brett had her fortune told.

It was a good morning, there were high white clouds above the mountains.
It had rained a little in the night and it was fresh and cool on the
plateau, and there was a wonderful view. We all felt good and we felt
healthy, and I felt quite friendly to Cohn. You could not be upset about
anything on a day like that.

That was the last day before the fiesta.




                                CHAPTER
                                   15


At noon of Sunday, the 6th of July, the fiesta exploded. There is no
other way to describe it. People had been coming in all day from the
country, but they were assimilated in the town and you did not notice
them. The square was as quiet in the hot sun as on any other day. The
peasants were in the outlying wine-shops. There they were drinking,
getting ready for the fiesta. They had come in so recently from the
plains and the hills that it was necessary that they make their shifting
in values gradually. They could not start in paying café prices. They
got their money’s worth in the wine-shops. Money still had a definite
value in hours worked and bushels of grain sold. Late in the fiesta it
would not matter what they paid, nor where they bought.

Now on the day of the starting of the fiesta of San Fermin they had been
in the wine-shops of the narrow streets of the town since early morning.
Going down the streets in the morning on the way to mass in the
cathedral, I heard them singing through the open doors of the shops.
They were warming up. There were many people at the eleven o’clock mass.
San Fermin is also a religious festival.

I walked down the hill from the cathedral and up the street to the café
on the square. It was a little before noon. Robert Cohn and Bill were
sitting at one of the tables. The marble-topped tables and the white
wicker chairs were gone. They were replaced by cast-iron tables and
severe folding chairs. The café was like a battleship stripped for
action. To-day the waiters did not leave you alone all morning to read
without asking if you wanted to order something. A waiter came up as
soon as I sat down.

“What are you drinking?” I asked Bill and Robert.

“Sherry,” Cohn said.

“Jerez,” I said to the waiter.

Before the waiter brought the sherry the rocket that announced the
fiesta went up in the square. It burst and there was a gray ball of
smoke high up above the Theatre Gayarre, across on the other side of the
plaza. The ball of smoke hung in the sky like a shrapnel burst, and as I
watched, another rocket came up to it, trickling smoke in the bright
sunlight. I saw the bright flash as it burst and another little cloud of
smoke appeared. By the time the second rocket had burst there were so
many people in the arcade, that had been empty a minute before, that the
waiter, holding the bottle high up over his head, could hardly get
through the crowd to our table. People were coming into the square from
all sides, and down the street we heard the pipes and the fifes and the
drums coming. They were playing the _riau-riau_ music, the pipes shrill
and the drums pounding, and behind them came the men and boys dancing.
When the fifers stopped they all crouched down in the street, and when
the reed-pipes and the fifes shrilled, and the flat, dry, hollow drums
tapped it out again, they all went up in the air dancing. In the crowd
you saw only the heads and shoulders of the dancers going up and down.

In the square a man, bent over, was playing on a reed-pipe, and a crowd
of children were following him shouting, and pulling at his clothes. He
came out of the square, the children following him, and piped them past
the café and down a side street. We saw his blank pockmarked face as he
went by, piping, the children close behind him shouting and pulling at
him.

“He must be the village idiot,” Bill said. “My God! look at that!”

Down the street came dancers. The street was solid with dancers, all
men. They were all dancing in time behind their own fifers and drummers.
They were a club of some sort, and all wore workmen’s blue smocks, and
red handkerchiefs around their necks, and carried a great banner on two
poles. The banner danced up and down with them as they came down
surrounded by the crowd.

“Hurray for Wine! Hurray for the Foreigners!” was painted on the banner.

“Where are the foreigners?” Robert Cohn asked.

“We’re the foreigners,” Bill said.

All the time rockets were going up. The café tables were all full now.
The square was emptying of people and the crowd was filling the cafés.

“Where’s Brett and Mike?” Bill asked.

“I’ll go and get them,” Cohn said.

“Bring them here.”

The fiesta was really started. It kept up day and night for seven days.
The dancing kept up, the drinking kept up, the noise went on. The things
that happened could only have happened during a fiesta. Everything
became quite unreal finally and it seemed as though nothing could have
any consequences. It seemed out of place to think of consequences during
the fiesta. All during the fiesta you had the feeling, even when it was
quiet, that you had to shout any remark to make it heard. It was the
same feeling about any action. It was a fiesta and it went on for seven
days.

That afternoon was the big religious procession. San Fermin was
translated from one church to another. In the procession were all the
dignitaries, civil and religious. We could not see them because the
crowd was too great. Ahead of the formal procession and behind it danced
the _riau-riau_ dancers. There was one mass of yellow shirts dancing up
and down in the crowd. All we could see of the procession through the
closely pressed people that crowded all the side streets and curbs were
the great giants, cigar-store Indians, thirty feet high, Moors, a King
and Queen, whirling and waltzing solemnly to the _riau-riau_.

They were all standing outside the chapel where San Fermin and the
dignitaries had passed in, leaving a guard of soldiers, the giants, with
the men who danced in them standing beside their resting frames, and the
dwarfs moving with their whacking bladders through the crowd. We started
inside and there was a smell of incense and people filing back into the
church, but Brett was stopped just inside the door because she had no
hat, so we went out again and along the street that ran back from the
chapel into town. The street was lined on both sides with people keeping
their place at the curb for the return of the procession. Some dancers
formed a circle around Brett and started to dance. They wore big wreaths
of white garlics around their necks. They took Bill and me by the arms
and put us in the circle. Bill started to dance, too. They were all
chanting. Brett wanted to dance but they did not want her to. They
wanted her as an image to dance around. When the song ended with the
sharp _riau-riau!_ they rushed us into a wine-shop.

We stood at the counter. They had Brett seated on a wine-cask. It was
dark in the wine-shop and full of men singing, hard-voiced singing. Back
of the counter they drew the wine from casks. I put down money for the
wine, but one of the men picked it up and put it back in my pocket.

“I want a leather wine-bottle,” Bill said.

“There’s a place down the street,” I said. “I’ll go get a couple.”

The dancers did not want me to go out. Three of them were sitting on the
high wine-cask beside Brett, teaching her to drink out of the
wine-skins. They had hung a wreath of garlics around her neck. Some one
insisted on giving her a glass. Somebody was teaching Bill a song.
Singing it into his ear. Beating time on Bill’s back.

I explained to them that I would be back. Outside in the street I went
down the street looking for the shop that made leather wine-bottles. The
crowd was packed on the sidewalks and many of the shops were shuttered,
and I could not find it. I walked as far as the church, looking on both
sides of the street. Then I asked a man and he took me by the arm and
led me to it. The shutters were up but the door was open.

Inside it smelled of fresh tanned leather and hot tar. A man was
stencilling completed wine-skins. They hung from the roof in bunches. He
took one down, blew it up, screwed the nozzle tight, and then jumped on
it

“See! It doesn’t leak.”

“I want another one, too. A big one.”

He took down a big one that would hold a gallon or more, from the roof.
He blew it up, his cheeks puffing ahead of the wine-skin, and stood on
the bota holding on to a chair.

“What are you going to do? Sell them in Bayonne?”

“No. Drink out of them.”

He slapped me on the back.

“Good man. Eight pesetas for the two. The lowest price.”

The man who was stencilling the new ones and tossing them into a pile
stopped.

“It’s true,” he said. “Eight pesetas is cheap.”

I paid and went out and along the street back to the wine-shop. It was
darker than ever inside and very crowded. I did not see Brett and Bill,
and some one said they were in the back room. At the counter the girl
filled the two wine-skins for me. One held two litres. The other held
five litres. Filling them both cost three pesetas sixty centimos. Some
one at the counter, that I had never seen before, tried to pay for the
wine, but I finally paid for it myself. The man who had wanted to pay
then bought me a drink. He would not let me buy one in return, but said
he would take a rinse of the mouth from the new wine-bag. He tipped the
big five-litre bag up and squeezed it so the wine hissed against the
back of his throat.

“All right,” he said, and handed back the bag.

In the back room Brett and Bill were sitting on barrels surrounded by
the dancers. Everybody had his arms on everybody else’s shoulders, and
they were all singing. Mike was sitting at a table with several men in
their shirt-sleeves, eating from a bowl of tuna fish, chopped onions and
vinegar. They were all drinking wine and mopping up the oil and vinegar
with pieces of bread.

“Hello, Jake. Hello!” Mike called. “Come here. I want you to meet my
friends. We’re all having an hors-d’œuvre.”

I was introduced to the people at the table. They supplied their names
to Mike and sent for a fork for me.

“Stop eating their dinner, Michael,” Brett shouted from the
wine-barrels.

“I don’t want to eat up your meal,” I said when some one handed me a
fork.

“Eat,” he said. “What do you think it’s here for?”

I unscrewed the nozzle of the big wine-bottle and handed it around.
Every one took a drink, tipping the wine-skin at arm’s length.

Outside, above the singing, we could hear the music of the procession
going by.

“Isn’t that the procession?” Mike asked.

“Nada,” some one said. “It’s nothing. Drink up. Lift the bottle.”

“Where did they find you?” I asked Mike.

“Some one brought me here,” Mike said. “They said you were here.”

“Where’s Cohn?”

“He’s passed out,” Brett called. “They’ve put him away somewhere.”

“Where is he?”

“I don’t know.”

“How should we know,” Bill said. “I think he’s dead.”

“He’s not dead,” Mike said. “I know he’s not dead. He’s just passed out
on Anis del Mono.”

As he said Anis del Mono one of the men at the table looked up, brought
out a bottle from inside his smock, and handed it to me.

“No,” I said. “No, thanks!”

“Yes. Yes. Arriba! Up with the bottle!”

I took a drink. It tasted of licorice and warmed all the way. I could
feel it warming in my stomach.

“Where the hell is Cohn?”

“I don’t know,” Mike said. “I’ll ask. Where is the drunken comrade?” he
asked in Spanish.

“You want to see him?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Not me,” said Mike. “This gent.”

The Anis del Mono man wiped his mouth and stood up.

“Come on.”

In a back room Robert Cohn was sleeping quietly on some wine-casks. It
was almost too dark to see his face. They had covered him with a coat
and another coat was folded under his head. Around his neck and on his
chest was a big wreath of twisted garlics.

“Let him sleep,” the man whispered. “He’s all right.”

Two hours later Cohn appeared. He came into the front room still with
the wreath of garlics around his neck. The Spaniards shouted when he
came in. Cohn wiped his eyes and grinned.

“I must have been sleeping,” he said.

“Oh, not at all,” Brett said.

“You were only dead,” Bill said.

“Aren’t we going to go and have some supper?” Cohn asked.

“Do you want to eat?”

“Yes. Why not? I’m hungry.”

“Eat those garlics, Robert,” Mike said. “I say. Do eat those garlics.”

Cohn stood there. His sleep had made him quite all right.

“Do let’s go and eat,” Brett said. “I must get a bath.”

“Come on,” Bill said. “Let’s translate Brett to the hotel.”

We said good-bye to many people and shook hands with many people and
went out. Outside it was dark.

“What time is it do you suppose?” Cohn asked.

“It’s to-morrow,” Mike said. “You’ve been asleep two days.”

“No,” said Cohn, “what time is it?”

“It’s ten o’clock.”

“What a lot we’ve drunk.”

“You mean what a lot _we’ve_ drunk. You went to sleep.”

Going down the dark streets to the hotel we saw the sky-rockets going up
in the square. Down the side streets that led to the square we saw the
square solid with people, those in the centre all dancing.

It was a big meal at the hotel. It was the first meal of the prices
being doubled for the fiesta, and there were several new courses. After
the dinner we were out in the town. I remember resolving that I would
stay up all night to watch the bulls go through the streets at six
o’clock in the morning, and being so sleepy that I went to bed around
four o’clock. The others stayed up.

My own room was locked and I could not find the key, so I went up-stairs
and slept on one of the beds in Cohn’s room. The fiesta was going on
outside in the night, but I was too sleepy for it to keep me awake. When
I woke it was the sound of the rocket exploding that announced the
release of the bulls from the corrals at the edge of town. They would
race through the streets and out to the bull-ring. I had been sleeping
heavily and I woke feeling I was too late. I put on a coat of Cohn’s and
went out on the balcony. Down below the narrow street was empty. All the
balconies were crowded with people. Suddenly a crowd came down the
street. They were all running, packed close together. They passed along
and up the street toward the bull-ring and behind them came more men
running faster, and then some stragglers who were really running. Behind
them was a little bare space, and then the bulls galloping, tossing
their heads up and down. It all went out of sight around the corner. One
man fell, rolled to the gutter, and lay quiet. But the bulls went right
on and did not notice him. They were all running together.

After they went out of sight a great roar came from the bull-ring. It
kept on. Then finally the pop of the rocket that meant the bulls had
gotten through the people in the ring and into the corrals. I went back
in the room and got into bed. I had been standing on the stone balcony
in bare feet. I knew our crowd must have all been out at the bull-ring.
Back in bed, I went to sleep.

Cohn woke me when he came in. He started to undress and went over and
closed the window because the people on the balcony of the house just
across the street were looking in.

“Did you see the show?” I asked.

“Yes. We were all there.”

“Anybody get hurt?”

“One of the bulls got into the crowd in the ring and tossed six or eight
people.”

“How did Brett like it?”

“It was all so sudden there wasn’t any time for it to bother anybody.”

“I wish I’d been up.”

“We didn’t know where you were. We went to your room but it was locked.”

“Where did you stay up?”

“We danced at some club.”

“I got sleepy,” I said.

“My gosh! I’m sleepy now,” Cohn said. “Doesn’t this thing ever stop?”

“Not for a week.”

Bill opened the door and put his head in.

“Where were you, Jake?”

“I saw them go through from the balcony. How was it?”

“Grand.”

“Where you going?”

“To sleep.”

No one was up before noon. We ate at tables set out under the arcade.
The town was full of people. We had to wait for a table. After lunch we
went over to the Iruña. It had filled up, and as the time for the
bull-fight came it got fuller, and the tables were crowded closer. There
was a close, crowded hum that came every day before the bull-fight. The
café did not make this same noise at any other time, no matter how
crowded it was. This hum went on, and we were in it and a part of it.

I had taken six seats for all the fights. Three of them were barreras,
the first row at the ring-side, and three were sobrepuertos, seats with
wooden backs, half-way up the amphitheatre. Mike thought Brett had best
sit high up for her first time, and Cohn wanted to sit with them. Bill
and I were going to sit in the barreras, and I gave the extra ticket to
a waiter to sell. Bill said something to Cohn about what to do and how
to look so he would not mind the horses. Bill had seen one season of
bull-fights.

“I’m not worried about how I’ll stand it. I’m only afraid I may be
bored,” Cohn said.

“You think so?”

“Don’t look at the horses, after the bull hits them,” I said to Brett.
“Watch the charge and see the picador try and keep the bull off, but
then don’t look again until the horse is dead if it’s been hit.”

“I’m a little nervy about it,” Brett said. “I’m worried whether I’ll be
able to go through with it all right.”

“You’ll be all right. There’s nothing but that horse part that will
bother you, and they’re only in for a few minutes with each bull. Just
don’t watch when it’s bad.”

“She’ll be all right,” Mike said. “I’ll look after her.”

“I don’t think you’ll be bored,” Bill said.

“I’m going over to the hotel to get the glasses and the wine-skin,” I
said. “See you back here. Don’t get cock-eyed.”

“I’ll come along,” Bill said. Brett smiled at us.

We walked around through the arcade to avoid the heat of the square.

“That Cohn gets me,” Bill said. “He’s got this Jewish superiority so
strong that he thinks the only emotion he’ll get out of the fight will
be being bored.”

“We’ll watch him with the glasses,” I said.

“Oh, to hell with him!”

“He spends a lot of time there.”

“I want him to stay there.”

In the hotel on the stairs we met Montoya.

“Come on,” said Montoya. “Do you want to meet Pedro Romero?”

“Fine,” said Bill. “Let’s go see him.”

We followed Montoya up a flight and down the corridor.

“He’s in room number eight,” Montoya explained. “He’s getting dressed
for the bull-fight.”

Montoya knocked on the door and opened it. It was a gloomy room with a
little light coming in from the window on the narrow street. There were
two beds separated by a monastic partition. The electric light was on.
The boy stood very straight and unsmiling in his bull-fighting clothes.
His jacket hung over the back of a chair. They were just finishing
winding his sash. His black hair shone under the electric light. He wore
a white linen shirt and the sword-handler finished his sash and stood up
and stepped back. Pedro Romero nodded, seeming very far away and
dignified when we shook hands. Montoya said something about what great
aficionados we were, and that we wanted to wish him luck. Romero
listened very seriously. Then he turned to me. He was the best-looking
boy I have ever seen.

“You go to the bull-fight,” he said in English.

“You know English,” I said, feeling like an idiot.

“No,” he answered, and smiled.

One of three men who had been sitting on the beds came up and asked us
if we spoke French. “Would you like me to interpret for you? Is there
anything you would like to ask Pedro Romero?”

We thanked him. What was there that you would like to ask? The boy was
nineteen years old, alone except for his sword-handler, and the three
hangers-on, and the bull-fight was to commence in twenty minutes. We
wished him “Mucha suerte,” shook hands, and went out. He was standing,
straight and handsome and altogether by himself, alone in the room with
the hangers-on as we shut the door.

“He’s a fine boy, don’t you think so?” Montoya asked.

“He’s a good-looking kid,” I said.

“He looks like a torero,” Montoya said. “He has the type.”

“He’s a fine boy.”

“We’ll see how he is in the ring,” Montoya said.

We found the big leather wine-bottle leaning against the wall in my
room, took it and the field-glasses, locked the door, and went
down-stairs.

It was a good bull-fight. Bill and I were very excited about Pedro
Romero. Montoya was sitting about ten places away. After Romero had
killed his first bull Montoya caught my eye and nodded his head. This
was a real one. There had not been a real one for a long time. Of the
other two matadors, one was very fair and the other was passable. But
there was no comparison with Romero, although neither of his bulls was
much.

Several times during the bull-fight I looked up at Mike and Brett and
Cohn, with the glasses. They seemed to be all right. Brett did not look
upset. All three were leaning forward on the concrete railing in front
of them.

“Let me take the glasses,” Bill said.

“Does Cohn look bored?” I asked.

“That kike!”

Outside the ring, after the bull-fight was over, you could not move in
the crowd. We could not make our way through but had to be moved with
the whole thing, slowly, as a glacier, back to town. We had that
disturbed emotional feeling that always comes after a bull-fight, and
the feeling of elation that comes after a good bull-fight. The fiesta
was going on. The drums pounded and the pipe music was shrill, and
everywhere the flow of the crowd was broken by patches of dancers. The
dancers were in a crowd, so you did not see the intricate play of the
feet. All you saw was the heads and shoulders going up and down, up and
down. Finally, we got out of the crowd and made for the café. The waiter
saved chairs for the others, and we each ordered an absinthe and watched
the crowd in the square and the dancers.

“What do you suppose that dance is?” Bill asked.

“It’s a sort of jota.”

“They’re not all the same,” Bill said. “They dance differently to all
the different tunes.”

“It’s swell dancing.”

In front of us on a clear part of the street a company of boys were
dancing. The steps were very intricate and their faces were intent and
concentrated. They all looked down while they danced. Their rope-soled
shoes tapped and spatted on the pavement. The toes touched. The heels
touched. The balls of the feet touched. Then the music broke wildly and
the step was finished and they were all dancing on up the street.

“Here come the gentry,” Bill said.

They were crossing the street

“Hello, men,” I said.

“Hello, gents!” said Brett. “You saved us seats? How nice.”

“I say,” Mike said, “that Romero what’shisname is somebody. Am I wrong?”

“Oh, isn’t he lovely,” Brett said. “And those green trousers.”

“Brett never took her eyes off them.”

“I say, I must borrow your glasses to-morrow.”

“How did it go?”

“Wonderfully! Simply perfect. I say, it is a spectacle!”

“How about the horses?”

“I couldn’t help looking at them.”

“She couldn’t take her eyes off them,” Mike said. “She’s an
extraordinary wench.”

“They do have some rather awful things happen to them,” Brett said. “I
couldn’t look away, though.”

“Did you feel all right?”

“I didn’t feel badly at all.”

“Robert Cohn did,” Mike put in. “You were quite green, Robert.”

“The first horse did bother me,” Cohn said.

“You weren’t bored, were you?” asked Bill.

Cohn laughed.

“No. I wasn’t bored. I wish you’d forgive me that.”

“It’s all right,” Bill said, “so long as you weren’t bored.”

“He didn’t look bored,” Mike said. “I thought he was going to be sick.”

“I never felt that bad. It was just for a minute.”

“I thought he was going to be sick. You weren’t bored, were you,
Robert?”

“Let up on that, Mike. I said I was sorry I said it.”

“He was, you know. He was positively green.”

“Oh, shove it along, Michael.”

“You mustn’t ever get bored at your first bull-fight, Robert,” Mike
said. “It might make such a mess.”

“Oh, shove it along, Michael,” Brett said.

“He said Brett was a sadist,” Mike said. “Brett’s not a sadist. She’s
just a lovely, healthy wench.”

“Are you a sadist, Brett?” I asked.

“Hope not.”

“He said Brett was a sadist just because she has a good, healthy
stomach.”

“Won’t be healthy long.”

Bill got Mike started on something else than Cohn. The waiter brought
the absinthe glasses.

“Did you really like it?” Bill asked Cohn.

“No, I can’t say I liked it. I think it’s a wonderful show.”

“Gad, yes! What a spectacle!” Brett said.

“I wish they didn’t have the horse part,” Cohn said.

“They’re not important,” Bill said. “After a while you never notice
anything disgusting.”

“It is a bit strong just at the start,” Brett said. “There’s a dreadful
moment for me just when the bull starts for the horse.”

“The bulls were fine,” Cohn said.

“They were very good,” Mike said.

“I want to sit down below, next time.” Brett drank from her glass of
absinthe.

“She wants to see the bull-fighters close by,” Mike said.

“They are something,” Brett said. “That Romero lad is just a child.”

“He’s a damned good-looking boy,” I said. “When we were up in his room I
never saw a better-looking kid.”

“How old do you suppose he is?”

“Nineteen or twenty.”

“Just imagine it.”

The bull-fight on the second day was much better than on the first.
Brett sat between Mike and me at the barrera, and Bill and Cohn went up
above. Romero was the whole show. I do not think Brett saw any other
bull-fighter. No one else did either, except the hard-shelled
technicians. It was all Romero. There were two other matadors, but they
did not count. I sat beside Brett and explained to Brett what it was all
about. I told her about watching the bull, not the horse, when the bulls
charged the picadors, and got her to watching the picador place the
point of his pic so that she saw what it was all about, so that it
became more something that was going on with a definite end, and less of
a spectacle with unexplained horrors. I had her watch how Romero took
the bull away from a fallen horse with his cape, and how he held him
with the cape and turned him, smoothly and suavely, never wasting the
bull. She saw how Romero avoided every brusque movement and saved his
bulls for the last when he wanted them, not winded and discomposed but
smoothly worn down. She saw how close Romero always worked to the bull,
and I pointed out to her the tricks the other bull-fighters used to make
it look as though they were working closely. She saw why she liked
Romero’s cape-work and why she did not like the others.

Romero never made any contortions, always it was straight and pure and
natural in line. The others twisted themselves like corkscrews, their
elbows raised, and leaned against the flanks of the bull after his horns
had passed, to give a faked look of danger. Afterward, all that was
faked turned bad and gave an unpleasant feeling. Romero’s bull-fighting
gave real emotion, because he kept the absolute purity of line in his
movements and always quietly and calmly let the horns pass him close
each time. He did not have to emphasize their closeness. Brett saw how
something that was beautiful done close to the bull was ridiculous if it
were done a little way off. I told her how since the death of Joselito
all the bull-fighters had been developing a technic that simulated this
appearance of danger in order to give a fake emotional feeling, while
the bull-fighter was really safe. Romero had the old thing, the holding
of his purity of line through the maximum of exposure, while he
dominated the bull by making him realize he was unattainable, while he
prepared him for the killing.

“I’ve never seen him do an awkward thing,” Brett said.

“You won’t until he gets frightened,” I said.

“He’ll never be frightened,” Mike said. “He knows too damned much.”

“He knew everything when he started. The others can’t ever learn what he
was born with.”

“And God, what looks,” Brett said.

“I believe, you know, that she’s falling in love with this bull-fighter
chap,” Mike said.

“I wouldn’t be surprised.”

“Be a good chap, Jake. Don’t tell her anything more about him. Tell her
how they beat their old mothers.”

“Tell me what drunks they are.”

“Oh, frightful,” Mike said. “Drunk all day and spend all their time
beating their poor old mothers.”

“He looks that way,” Brett said.

“Doesn’t he?” I said.

They had hitched the mules to the dead bull and then the whips cracked,
the men ran, and the mules, straining forward, their legs pushing, broke
into a gallop, and the bull, one horn up, his head on its side, swept a
swath smoothly across the sand and out the red gate.

“This next is the last one.”

“Not really,” Brett said. She leaned forward on the barrera. Romero
waved his picadors to their places, then stood, his cape against his
chest, looking across the ring to where the bull would come out.

After it was over we went out and were pressed tight in the crowd.

“These bull-fights are hell on one,” Brett said. “I’m limp as a rag.”

“Oh, you’ll get a drink,” Mike said.

The next day Pedro Romero did not fight. It was Miura bulls, and a very
bad bull-fight. The next day there was no bull-fight scheduled. But all
day and all night the fiesta kept on.




                                CHAPTER
                                   16


In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from
the sea. You could not see the tops of the mountains. The plateau was
dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were
changed. I walked out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad
weather was coming over the mountains from the sea.

The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners
were wet and hung damp against the front of the houses, and in between
the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the
arcades and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and
dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any pause. It was only
driven under cover.

The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting
out of the rain watching the concourse of Basque and Navarrais dancers
and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes
danced down the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp,
and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big, heavy-footed
horses, their costumes wet, the horses’ coats wet in the rain. The crowd
was in the cafés and the dancers came in, too, and sat, their
tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their
belled caps, and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs
to dry. It was raining hard outside.

I left the crowd in the café and went over to the hotel to get shaved
for dinner. I was shaving in my room when there was a knock on the door.

“Come in,” I called.

Montoya walked in.

“How are you?” he said.

“Fine,” I said.

“No bulls to-day.”

“No,” I said, “nothing but rain.”

“Where are your friends?”

“Over at the Iruña.”

Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile.

“Look,” he said. “Do you know the American ambassador?”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody knows the American ambassador.”

“He’s here in town, now.”

“Yes,” I said. “Everybody’s seen them.”

“I’ve seen them, too,” Montoya said. He didn’t say anything. I went on
shaving.

“Sit down,” I said. “Let me send for a drink.”

“No, I have to go.”

I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with
cold water. Montoya was standing there looking more embarrassed.

“Look,” he said. “I’ve just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel
that they want Pedro Romero and Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee
to-night after dinner.”

“Well,” I said, “it can’t hurt Marcial any.”

“Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this
morning with Marquez. I don’t think they’ll be back to-night.”

Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something.

“Don’t give Romero the message,” I said.

“You think so?”

“Absolutely.”

Montoya was very pleased.

“I wanted to ask you because you were an American,” he said.

“That’s what I’d do.”

“Look,” said Montoya. “People take a boy like that. They don’t know what
he’s worth. They don’t know what he means. Any foreigner can flatter
him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year they’re
through.”

“Like Algabeno,” I said.

“Yes, like Algabeno.”

“They’re a fine lot,” I said. “There’s one American woman down here now
that collects bull-fighters.”

“I know. They only want the young ones.”

“Yes,” I said. “The old ones get fat.”

“Or crazy like Gallo.”

“Well,” I said, “it’s easy. All you have to do is not give him the
message.”

“He’s such a fine boy,” said Montoya. “He ought to stay with his own
people. He shouldn’t mix in that stuff.”

“Won’t you have a drink?” I asked.

“No,” said Montoya, “I have to go.” He went out.

I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the
arcades around the square. It was still raining. I looked in at the
Iruña for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the
square and back to the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs
dining-room.

They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill
was buying shoe-shines for Mike. Bootblacks opened the street door and
each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike.

“This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished,” Mike said. “I
say, Bill is an ass.”

The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in.

“Limpia botas?” he said to Bill.

“No,” said Bill. “For this Señor.”

The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mike’s
free shoe that shone already in the electric light.

“Bill’s a yell of laughter,” Mike said.

I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little
uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I looked around the room. At
the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me
to come over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost
touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bull-fight critic, a little man
with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was
very pleased. We talked Spanish and the critic knew a little French. I
reached to our table for my wine-bottle, but the critic took my arm.
Romero laughed.

“Drink here,” he said in English.

He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased
with it, and as we went on talking he brought out words he was not sure
of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for
_Corrida de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious
of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the _lidia_ of a _toro_.
The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bulls—the
French translation is _Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in.
There is no Spanish word for bull-fight.

Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was
born in Ronda. That is not far above Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting
in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it
three years. The bull-fight critic joked him about the number of
_Malagueño_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he said. His
older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in
this hotel. He lived in a smaller hotel with the other people who worked
for Romero. He asked me how many times I had seen him in the ring. I
told him only three. It was really only two, but I did not want to
explain after I had made the mistake.

“Where did you see me the other time? In Madrid?”

“Yes,” I lied. I had read the accounts of his two appearances in Madrid
in the bull-fight papers, so I was all right.

“The first or the second time?”

“The first.”

“I was very bad,” he said. “The second time I was better. You remember?”
He turned to the critic.

He was not at all embarrassed. He talked of his work as something
altogether apart from himself. There was nothing conceited or braggartly
about him.

“I like it very much that you like my work,” he said. “But you haven’t
seen it yet. To-morrow, if I get a good bull, I will try and show it to
you.”

When he said this he smiled, anxious that neither the bull-fight critic
nor I would think he was boasting.

“I am anxious to see it,” the critic said. “I would like to be
convinced.”

“He doesn’t like my work much.” Romero turned to me. He was serious.

The critic explained that he liked it very much, but that so far it had
been incomplete.

“Wait till to-morrow, if a good one comes out.”

“Have you seen the bulls for to-morrow?” the critic asked me.

“Yes. I saw them unloaded.”

Pedro Romero leaned forward.

“What did you think of them?”

“Very nice,” I said. “About twenty-six arrobas. Very short horns.
Haven’t you seen them?”

“Oh, yes,” said Romero.

“They won’t weigh twenty-six arrobas,” said the critic.

“No,” said Romero.

“They’ve got bananas for horns,” the critic said.

“You call them bananas?” asked Romero. He turned to me and smiled.
“_You_ wouldn’t call them bananas?”

“No,” I said. “They’re horns all right.”

“They’re very short,” said Pedro Romero. “Very, very short. Still, they
aren’t bananas.”

“I say, Jake,” Brett called from the next table, “you _have_ deserted
us.”

“Just temporarily,” I said. “We’re talking bulls.”

“You _are_ superior.”

“Tell him that bulls have no balls,” Mike shouted. He was drunk.

Romero looked at me inquiringly.

“Drunk,” I said. “Borracho! Muy borracho!”

“You might introduce your friends,” Brett said. She had not stopped
looking at Pedro Romero. I asked them if they would like to have coffee
with us. They both stood up. Romero’s face was very brown. He had very
nice manners.

I introduced them all around and they started to sit down, but there was
not enough room, so we all moved over to the big table by the wall to
have coffee. Mike ordered a bottle of Fundador and glasses for
everybody. There was a lot of drunken talking.

“Tell him I think writing is lousy,” Bill said. “Go on, tell him. Tell
him I’m ashamed of being a writer.”

Pedro Romero was sitting beside Brett and listening to her.

“Go on. Tell him!” Bill said.

Romero looked up smiling.

“This gentleman,” I said, “is a writer.”

Romero was impressed. “This other one, too,” I said, pointing at Cohn.

“He looks like Villalta,” Romero said, looking at Bill. “Rafael, doesn’t
he look like Villalta?”

“I can’t see it,” the critic said.

“Really,” Romero said in Spanish. “He looks a lot like Villalta. What
does the drunken one do?”

“Nothing.”

“Is that why he drinks?”

“No. He’s waiting to marry this lady.”

“Tell him bulls have no balls!” Mike shouted, very drunk, from the other
end of the table.

“What does he say?”

“He’s drunk.”

“Jake,” Mike called. “Tell him bulls have no balls!”

“You understand?” I said.

“Yes.”

I was sure he didn’t, so it was all right.

“Tell him Brett wants to see him put on those green pants.”

“Pipe down, Mike.”

“Tell him Brett is dying to know how he can get into those pants.”

“Pipe down.”

During this Romero was fingering his glass and talking with Brett. Brett
was talking French and he was talking Spanish and a little English, and
laughing.

Bill was filling the glasses.

“Tell him Brett wants to come into——”

“Oh, pipe down, Mike, for Christ’s sake!”

Romero looked up smiling. “Pipe down! I know that,” he said.

Just then Montoya came into the room. He started to smile at me, then he
saw Pedro Romero with a big glass of cognac in his hand, sitting
laughing between me and a woman with bare shoulders, at a table full of
drunks. He did not even nod.

Montoya went out of the room. Mike was on his feet proposing a toast.
“Let’s all drink to—” he began. “Pedro Romero,” I said. Everybody stood
up. Romero took it very seriously, and we touched glasses and drank it
down, I rushing it a little because Mike was trying to make it clear
that that was not at all what he was going to drink to. But it went off
all right, and Pedro Romero shook hands with every one and he and the
critic went out together.

“My God! he’s a lovely boy,” Brett said. “And how I would love to see
him get into those clothes. He must use a shoe-horn.”

“I started to tell him,” Mike began. “And Jake kept interrupting me. Why
do you interrupt me? Do you think you talk Spanish better than I do?”

“Oh, shut up, Mike! Nobody interrupted you.”

“No, I’d like to get this settled.” He turned away from me. “Do you
think you amount to something, Cohn? Do you think you belong here among
us? People who are out to have a good time? For God’s sake don’t be so
noisy, Cohn!”

“Oh, cut it out, Mike,” Cohn said.

“Do you think Brett wants you here? Do you think you add to the party?
Why don’t you say something?”

“I said all I had to say the other night, Mike.”

“I’m not one of you literary chaps.” Mike stood shakily and leaned
against the table. “I’m not clever. But I do know when I’m not wanted.
Why don’t you see when you’re not wanted, Cohn? Go away. Go away, for
God’s sake. Take that sad Jewish face away. Don’t you think I’m right?”

He looked at us.

“Sure,” I said. “Let’s all go over to the Iruña.”

“No. Don’t you think I’m right? I love that woman.”

“Oh, don’t start that again. Do shove it along, Michael,” Brett said.

“Don’t you think I’m right, Jake?”

Cohn still sat at the table. His face had the sallow, yellow look it got
when he was insulted, but somehow he seemed to be enjoying it. The
childish, drunken heroics of it. It was his affair with a lady of title.

“Jake,” Mike said. He was almost crying. “You know I’m right. Listen,
you!” He turned to Cohn: “Go away! Go away now!”

“But I won’t go, Mike,” said Cohn.

“Then I’ll make you!” Mike started toward him around the table. Cohn
stood up and took off his glasses. He stood waiting, his face sallow,
his hands fairly low, proudly and firmly waiting for the assault, ready
to do battle for his lady love.

I grabbed Mike. “Come on to the café,” I said. “You can’t hit him here
in the hotel.”

“Good!” said Mike. “Good idea!”

We started off. I looked back as Mike stumbled up the stairs and saw
Cohn putting his glasses on again. Bill was sitting at the table pouring
another glass of Fundador. Brett was sitting looking straight ahead at
nothing.

Outside on the square it had stopped raining and the moon was trying to
get through the clouds. There was a wind blowing. The military band was
playing and the crowd was massed on the far side of the square where the
fireworks specialist and his son were trying to send up fire balloons. A
balloon would start up jerkily, on a great bias, and be torn by the wind
or blown against the houses of the square. Some fell into the crowd. The
magnesium flared and the fireworks exploded and chased about in the
crowd. There was no one dancing in the square. The gravel was too wet.

Brett came out with Bill and joined us. We stood in the crowd and
watched Don Manuel Orquito, the fireworks king, standing on a little
platform, carefully starting the balloons with sticks, standing above
the heads of the crowd to launch the balloons off into the wind. The
wind brought them all down, and Don Manuel Orquito’s face was sweaty in
the light of his complicated fireworks that fell into the crowd and
charged and chased, sputtering and cracking, between the legs of the
people. The people shouted as each new luminous paper bubble careened,
caught fire, and fell.

“They’re razzing Don Manuel,” Bill said.

“How do you know he’s Don Manuel?” Brett said.

“His name’s on the programme. Don Manuel Orquito, the pirotecnico of
esta ciudad.”

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A collection of globos illuminados.
That’s what the paper said.”

The wind blew the band music away.

“I say, I wish one would go up,” Brett said. “That Don Manuel chap is
furious.”

“He’s probably worked for weeks fixing them to go off, spelling out
‘Hail to San Fermin,’” Bill said.

“Globos illuminados,” Mike said. “A bunch of bloody globos illuminados.”

“Come on,” said Brett. “We can’t stand here.”

“Her ladyship wants a drink,” Mike said.

“How you know things,” Brett said.

Inside, the café was crowded and very noisy. No one noticed us come in.
We could not find a table. There was a great noise going on.

“Come on, let’s get out of here,” Bill said.

Outside the paseo was going in under the arcade. There were some English
and Americans from Biarritz in sport clothes scattered at the tables.
Some of the women stared at the people going by with lorgnons. We had
acquired, at some time, a friend of Bill’s from Biarritz. She was
staying with another girl at the Grand Hotel. The other girl had a
headache and had gone to bed.

“Here’s the pub,” Mike said. It was the Bar Milano, a small, tough bar
where you could get food and where they danced in the back room. We all
sat down at a table and ordered a bottle of Fundador. The bar was not
full. There was nothing going on.

“This is a hell of a place,” Bill said.

“It’s too early.”

“Let’s take the bottle and come back later,” Bill said. “I don’t want to
sit here on a night like this.”

“Let’s go and look at the English,” Mike said. “I love to look at the
English.”

“They’re awful,” Bill said. “Where did they all come from?”

“They come from Biarritz,” Mike said, “They come to see the last day of
the quaint little Spanish fiesta.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said.

“You’re an extraordinarily beautiful girl.” Mike turned to Bill’s
friend. “When did you come here?”

“Come off it, Michael.”

“I say, she _is_ a lovely girl. Where have I been? Where have I been
looking all this while? You’re a lovely thing. _Have_ we met? Come along
with me and Bill. We’re going to festa the English.”

“I’ll festa them,” Bill said, “What the hell are they doing at this
fiesta?”

“Come on,” Mike said. “Just us three. We’re going to festa the bloody
English. I hope you’re not English? I’m Scotch. I hate the English. I’m
going to festa them. Come on, Bill.”

Through the window we saw them, all three arm in arm, going toward the
café. Rockets were going up in the square.

“I’m going to sit here,” Brett said.

“I’ll stay with you,” Cohn said.

“Oh, don’t!” Brett said. “For God’s sake, go off somewhere. Can’t you
see Jake and I want to talk?”

“I didn’t,” Cohn said. “I thought I’d sit here because I felt a little
tight.”

“What a hell of a reason for sitting with any one. If you’re tight, go
to bed. Go on to bed.”

“Was I rude enough to him?” Brett asked. Cohn was gone. “My God! I’m so
sick of him!”

“He doesn’t add much to the gayety.”

“He depresses me so.”

“He’s behaved very badly.”

“Damned badly. He had a chance to behave so well.”

“He’s probably waiting just outside the door now.”

“Yes. He would. You know I do know how he feels. He can’t believe it
didn’t mean anything.”

“I know.”

“Nobody else would behave as badly. Oh, I’m so sick of the whole thing.
And Michael. Michael’s been lovely, too.”

“It’s been damned hard on Mike.”

“Yes. But he didn’t need to be a swine.”

“Everybody behaves badly,” I said. “Give them the proper chance.”

“You wouldn’t behave badly.” Brett looked at me.

“I’d be as big an ass as Cohn,” I said.

“Darling, don’t let’s talk a lot of rot.”

“All right. Talk about anything you like.”

“Don’t be difficult. You’re the only person I’ve got, and I feel rather
awful to-night.”

“You’ve got Mike.”

“Yes, Mike. Hasn’t he been pretty?”

“Well,” I said, “it’s been damned hard on Mike, having Cohn around and
seeing him with you.”

“Don’t I know it, darling? Please don’t make me feel any worse than I
do.”

Brett was nervous as I had never seen her before. She kept looking away
from me and looking ahead at the wall.

“Want to go for a walk?”

“Yes. Come on.”

I corked up the Fundador bottle and gave it to the bartender.

“Let’s have one more drink of that,” Brett said. “My nerves are rotten.”

We each drank a glass of the smooth amontillado brandy.

“Come on,” said Brett.

As we came out the door I saw Cohn walk out from under the arcade.

“He _was_ there,” Brett said.

“He can’t be away from you.”

“Poor devil!”

“I’m not sorry for him. I hate him, myself.”

“I hate him, too,” she shivered. “I hate his damned suffering.”

We walked arm in arm down the side street away from the crowd and the
lights of the square. The street was dark and wet, and we walked along
it to the fortifications at the edge of town. We passed wine-shops with
light coming out from their doors onto the black, wet street, and sudden
bursts of music.

“Want to go in?”

“No.”

We walked out across the wet grass and onto the stone wall of the
fortifications. I spread a newspaper on the stone and Brett sat down.
Across the plain it was dark, and we could see the mountains. The wind
was high up and took the clouds across the moon. Below us were the dark
pits of the fortifications. Behind were the trees and the shadow of the
cathedral, and the town silhouetted against the moon.

“Don’t feel bad,” I said.

“I feel like hell,” Brett said. “Don’t let’s talk.”

We looked out at the plain. The long lines of trees were dark in the
moonlight. There were the lights of a car on the road climbing the
mountain. Up on the top of the mountain we saw the lights of the fort.
Below to the left was the river. It was high from the rain, and black
and smooth. Trees were dark along the banks. We sat and looked out.
Brett stared straight ahead. Suddenly she shivered.

“It’s cold.”

“Want to walk back?”

“Through the park.”

We climbed down. It was clouding over again. In the park it was dark
under the trees.

“Do you still love me, Jake?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Because I’m a goner,” Brett said.

“How?”

“I’m a goner. I’m mad about the Romero boy. I’m in love with him, I
think.”

“I wouldn’t be if I were you.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner. It’s tearing me all up inside.”

“Don’t do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’ve never been able to help anything.”

“You ought to stop it.”

“How can I stop it? I can’t stop things. Feel that?”

Her hand was trembling.

“I’m like that all through.”

“You oughtn’t to do it.”

“I can’t help it. I’m a goner now, anyway. Don’t you see the
difference?”

“No.”

“I’ve got to do something. I’ve got to do something I really want to do.
I’ve lost my self-respect.”

“You don’t have to do that.”

“Oh, darling, don’t be difficult. What do you think it’s meant to have
that damned Jew about, and Mike the way he’s acted?”

“Sure.”

“I can’t just stay tight all the time.”

“No.”

“Oh, darling, please stay by me. Please stay by me and see me through
this.”

“Sure.”

“I don’t say it’s right. It is right though for me. God knows, I’ve
never felt such a bitch.”

“What do you want me to do?”

“Come on,” Brett said. “Let’s go and find him.”

Together we walked down the gravel path in the park in the dark, under
the trees and then out from under the trees and past the gate into the
street that led into town.

Pedro Romero was in the café. He was at a table with other bull-fighters
and bull-fight critics. They were smoking cigars. When we came in they
looked up. Romero smiled and bowed. We sat down at a table half-way down
the room.

“Ask him to come over and have a drink.”

“Not yet. He’ll come over.”

“I can’t look at him.”

“He’s nice to look at,” I said.

“I’ve always done just what I wanted.”

“I know.”

“I do feel such a bitch.”

“Well,” I said.

“My God!” said Brett, “the things a woman goes through.”

“Yes?”

“Oh, I do feel such a bitch.”

I looked across at the table. Pedro Romero smiled. He said something to
the other people at his table, and stood up. He came over to our table.
I stood up and we shook hands.

“Won’t you have a drink?”

“You must have a drink with me,” he said. He seated himself, asking
Brett’s permission without saying anything. He had very nice manners.
But he kept on smoking his cigar. It went well with his face.

“You like cigars?” I asked.

“Oh, yes. I always smoke cigars.”

It was part of his system of authority. It made him seem older. I
noticed his skin. It was clear and smooth and very brown. There was a
triangular scar on his cheek-bone. I saw he was watching Brett. He felt
there was something between them. He must have felt it when Brett gave
him her hand. He was being very careful. I think he was sure, but he did
not want to make any mistake.

“You fight to-morrow?” I said.

“Yes,” he said. “Algabeno was hurt to-day in Madrid. Did you hear?”

“No,” I said. “Badly?”

He shook his head.

“Nothing. Here,” he showed his hand. Brett reached out and spread the
fingers apart.

“Oh!” he said in English, “you tell fortunes?”

“Sometimes. Do you mind?”

“No. I like it.” He spread his hand flat on the table. “Tell me I live
for always, and be a millionaire.”

He was still very polite, but he was surer of himself. “Look,” he said,
“do you see any bulls in my hand?”

He laughed. His hand was very fine and the wrist was small.

“There are thousands of bulls,” Brett said. She was not at all nervous
now. She looked lovely.

“Good,” Romero laughed. “At a thousand duros apiece,” he said to me in
Spanish. “Tell me some more.”

“It’s a good hand,” Brett said. “I think he’ll live a long time.”

“Say it to me. Not to your friend.”

“I said you’d live a long time.”

“I know it,” Romero said. “I’m never going to die.”

I tapped with my finger-tips on the table. Romero saw it. He shook his
head.

“No. Don’t do that. The bulls are my best friends.”

I translated to Brett.

“You kill your friends?” she asked.

“Always,” he said in English, and laughed. “So they don’t kill me.” He
looked at her across the table.

“You know English well.”

“Yes,” he said. “Pretty well, sometimes. But I must not let anybody
know. It would be very bad, a torero who speaks English.”

“Why?” asked Brett.

“It would be bad. The people would not like it. Not yet.”

“Why not?”

“They would not like it. Bull-fighters are not like that.”

“What are bull-fighters like?”

He laughed and tipped his hat down over his eyes and changed the angle
of his cigar and the expression of his face.

“Like at the table,” he said. I glanced over. He had mimicked exactly
the expression of Nacional. He smiled, his face natural again. “No. I
must forget English.”

“Don’t forget it, yet,” Brett said.

“No?”

“No.”

“All right.”

He laughed again.

“I would like a hat like that,” Brett said.

“Good. I’ll get you one.”

“Right. See that you do.”

“I will. I’ll get you one to-night.”

I stood up. Romero rose, too.

“Sit down,” I said. “I must go and find our friends and bring them
here.”

He looked at me. It was a final look to ask if it were understood. It
was understood all right.

“Sit down,” Brett said to him. “You must teach me Spanish.”

He sat down and looked at her across the table. I went out. The
hard-eyed people at the bull-fighter table watched me go. It was not
pleasant. When I came back and looked in the café, twenty minutes later,
Brett and Pedro Romero were gone. The coffee-glasses and our three empty
cognac-glasses were on the table. A waiter came with a cloth and picked
up the glasses and mopped off the table.




                                CHAPTER
                                   17


Outside the Bar Milano I found Bill and Mike and Edna. Edna was the
girl’s name.

“We’ve been thrown out,” Edna said.

“By the police,” said Mike. “There’s some people in there that don’t
like me.”

“I’ve kept them out of four fights,” Edna said. “You’ve got to help me.”

Bill’s face was red.

“Come back in, Edna,” he said. “Go on in there and dance with Mike.”

“It’s silly,” Edna said. “There’ll just be another row.”

“Damned Biarritz swine,” Bill said.

“Come on,” Mike said. “After all, it’s a pub. They can’t occupy a whole
pub.”

“Good old Mike,” Bill said. “Damned English swine come here and insult
Mike and try and spoil the fiesta.”

“They’re so bloody,” Mike said. “I hate the English.”

“They can’t insult Mike,” Bill said. “Mike is a swell fellow. They can’t
insult Mike. I won’t stand it. Who cares if he is a damn bankrupt?” His
voice broke.

“Who cares?” Mike said. “I don’t care. Jake doesn’t care. Do _you_
care?”

“No,” Edna said. “Are you a bankrupt?”

“Of course I am. You don’t care, do you, Bill?”

Bill put his arm around Mike’s shoulder.

“I wish to hell I was a bankrupt. I’d show those bastards.”

“They’re just English,” Mike said. “It never makes any difference what
the English say.”

“The dirty swine,” Bill said. “I’m going to clean them out.”

“Bill,” Edna looked at me. “Please don’t go in again, Bill. They’re so
stupid.”

“That’s it,” said Mike. “They’re stupid. I knew that was what it was.”

“They can’t say things like that about Mike,” Bill said.

“Do you know them?” I asked Mike.

“No. I never saw them. They say they know me.”

“I won’t stand it,” Bill said.

“Come on. Let’s go over to the Suizo,” I said.

“They’re a bunch of Edna’s friends from Biarritz,” Bill said.

“They’re simply stupid,” Edna said.

“One of them’s Charley Blackman, from Chicago,” Bill said.

“I was never in Chicago,” Mike said.

Edna started to laugh and could not stop.

“Take me away from here,” she said, “you bankrupts.”

“What kind of a row was it?” I asked Edna. We were walking across the
square to the Suizo. Bill was gone.

“I don’t know what happened, but some one had the police called to keep
Mike out of the back room. There were some people that had known Mike at
Cannes. What’s the matter with Mike?”

“Probably he owes them money” I said. “That’s what people usually get
bitter about.”

In front of the ticket-booths out in the square there were two lines of
people waiting. They were sitting on chairs or crouched on the ground
with blankets and newspapers around them. They were waiting for the
wickets to open in the morning to buy tickets for the bull-fight. The
night was clearing and the moon was out. Some of the people in the line
were sleeping.

At the Café Suizo we had just sat down and ordered Fundador when Robert
Cohn came up.

“Where’s Brett?” he asked.

“I don’t know.”

“She was with you.”

“She must have gone to bed.”

“She’s not.”

“I don’t know where she is.”

His face was sallow under the light. He was standing up.

“Tell me where she is.”

“Sit down,” I said. “I don’t know where she is.”

“The hell you don’t!”

“You can shut your face.”

“Tell me where Brett is.”

“I’ll not tell you a damn thing.”

“You know where she is.”

“If I did I wouldn’t tell you.”

“Oh, go to hell, Cohn,” Mike called from the table. “Brett’s gone off
with the bull-fighter chap. They’re on their honeymoon.”

“You shut up.”

“Oh, go to hell!” Mike said languidly.

“Is that where she is?” Cohn turned to me.

“Go to hell!”

“She was with you. Is that where she is?”

“Go to hell!”

“I’ll make you tell me”—he stepped forward—“you damned pimp.”

I swung at him and he ducked. I saw his face duck sideways in the light.
He hit me and I sat down on the pavement. As I started to get on my feet
he hit me twice. I went down backward under a table. I tried to get up
and felt I did not have any legs. I felt I must get on my feet and try
and hit him. Mike helped me up. Some one poured a carafe of water on my
head. Mike had an arm around me, and I found I was sitting on a chair.
Mike was pulling at my ears.

“I say, you were cold,” Mike said.

“Where the hell were you?”

“Oh, I was around.”

“You didn’t want to mix in it?”

“He knocked Mike down, too,” Edna said.

“He didn’t knock me out,” Mike said. “I just lay there.”

“Does this happen every night at your fiestas?” Edna asked. “Wasn’t that
Mr. Cohn?”

“I’m all right,” I said. “My head’s a little wobbly.”

There were several waiters and a crowd of people standing around.

“Vaya!” said Mike. “Get away. Go on.”

The waiters moved the people away.

“It was quite a thing to watch,” Edna said. “He must be a boxer.”

“He is.”

“I wish Bill had been here,” Edna said. “I’d like to have seen Bill
knocked down, too. I’ve always wanted to see Bill knocked down. He’s so
big.”

“I was hoping he would knock down a waiter,” Mike said, “and get
arrested. I’d like to see Mr. Robert Cohn in jail.”

“No,” I said.

“Oh, no,” said Edna. “You don’t mean that.”

“I do, though,” Mike said. “I’m not one of these chaps likes being
knocked about. I never play games, even.”

Mike took a drink.

“I never liked to hunt, you know. There was always the danger of having
a horse fall on you. How do you feel, Jake?”

“All right.”

“You’re nice,” Edna said to Mike. “Are you really a bankrupt?”

“I’m a tremendous bankrupt,” Mike said. “I owe money to everybody. Don’t
you owe any money?”

“Tons.”

“I owe everybody money,” Mike said. “I borrowed a hundred pesetas from
Montoya to-night.”

“The hell you did,” I said.

“I’ll pay it back,” Mike said. “I always pay everything back.”

“That’s why you’re a bankrupt, isn’t it?” Edna said.

I stood up. I had heard them talking from a long way away. It all seemed
like some bad play.

“I’m going over to the hotel,” I said. Then I heard them talking about
me.

“Is he all right?” Edna asked.

“We’d better walk with him.”

“I’m all right,” I said. “Don’t come. I’ll see you all later.”

I walked away from the café. They were sitting at the table. I looked
back at them and at the empty tables. There was a waiter sitting at one
of the tables with his head in his hands.

Walking across the square to the hotel everything looked new and
changed. I had never seen the trees before. I had never seen the
flagpoles before, nor the front of the theatre. It was all different. I
felt as I felt once coming home from an out-of-town football game. I was
carrying a suitcase with my football things in it, and I walked up the
street from the station in the town I had lived in all my life and it
was all new. They were raking the lawns and burning leaves in the road,
and I stopped for a long time and watched. It was all strange. Then I
went on, and my feet seemed to be a long way off, and everything seemed
to come from a long way off, and I could hear my feet walking a great
distance away. I had been kicked in the head early in the game. It was
like that crossing the square. It was like that going up the stairs in
the hotel. Going up the stairs took a long time, and I had the feeling
that I was carrying my suitcase. There was a light in the room. Bill
came out and met me in the hall.

“Say,” he said, “go up and see Cohn. He’s been in a jam, and he’s asking
for you.”

“The hell with him.”

“Go on. Go on up and see him.”

I did not want to climb another flight of stairs.

“What are you looking at me that way for?”

“I’m not looking at you. Go on up and see Cohn. He’s in bad shape.”

“You were drunk a little while ago,” I said.

“I’m drunk now,” Bill said. “But you go up and see Cohn. He wants to see
you.”

“All right,” I said. It was just a matter of climbing more stairs. I
went on up the stairs carrying my phantom suitcase. I walked down the
hall to Cohn’s room. The door was shut and I knocked.

“Who is it?”

“Barnes.”

“Come in, Jake.”

I opened the door and went in, and set down my suitcase. There was no
light in the room. Cohn was lying, face down, on the bed in the dark.

“Hello, Jake.”

“Don’t call me Jake.”

I stood by the door. It was just like this that I had come home. Now it
was a hot bath that I needed. A deep, hot bath, to lie back in.

“Where’s the bathroom?” I asked.

Cohn was crying. There he was, face down on the bed, crying. He had on a
white polo shirt, the kind he’d worn at Princeton.

“I’m sorry, Jake. Please forgive me.”

“Forgive you, hell.”

“Please forgive me, Jake.”

I did not say anything. I stood there by the door.

“I was crazy. You must see how it was.”

“Oh, that’s all right.”

“I couldn’t stand it about Brett.”

“You called me a pimp.”

I did not care. I wanted a hot bath. I wanted a hot bath in deep water.

“I know. Please don’t remember it. I was crazy.”

“That’s all right.”

He was crying. His voice was funny. He lay there in his white shirt on
the bed in the dark. His polo shirt.

“I’m going away in the morning.”

He was crying without making any noise.

“I just couldn’t stand it about Brett. I’ve been through hell, Jake.
It’s been simply hell. When I met her down here Brett treated me as
though I were a perfect stranger. I just couldn’t stand it. We lived
together at San Sebastian. I suppose you know it. I can’t stand it any
more.”

He lay there on the bed.

“Well,” I said, “I’m going to take a bath.”

“You were the only friend I had, and I loved Brett so.”

“Well,” I said, “so long.”

“I guess it isn’t any use,” he said. “I guess it isn’t any damn use.”

“What?”

“Everything. Please say you forgive me, Jake.”

“Sure,” I said. “It’s all right.”

“I felt so terribly. I’ve been through such hell, Jake. Now everything’s
gone. Everything.”

“Well,” I said, “so long. I’ve got to go.”

He rolled over, sat on the edge of the bed, and then stood up.

“So long, Jake,” he said. “You’ll shake hands, won’t you?”

“Sure. Why not?”

We shook hands. In the dark I could not see his face very well.

“Well,” I said, “see you in the morning.”

“I’m going away in the morning.”

“Oh, yes,” I said.

I went out. Cohn was standing in the door of the room.

“Are you all right, Jake?” he asked.

“Oh, yes,” I said. “I’m all right.”

I could not find the bathroom. After a while I found it. There was a
deep stone tub. I turned on the taps and the water would not run. I sat
down on the edge of the bath-tub. When I got up to go I found I had
taken off my shoes. I hunted for them and found them and carried them
down-stairs. I found my room and went inside and undressed and got into
bed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

I woke with a headache and the noise of the bands going by in the
street. I remembered I had promised to take Bill’s friend Edna to see
the bulls go through the street and into the ring. I dressed and went
down-stairs and out into the cold early morning. People were crossing
the square, hurrying toward the bull-ring. Across the square were the
two lines of men in front of the ticket-booths. They were still waiting
for the tickets to go on sale at seven o’clock. I hurried across the
street to the café. The waiter told me that my friends had been there
and gone.

“How many were they?”

“Two gentlemen and a lady.”

That was all right. Bill and Mike were with Edna. She had been afraid
last night they would pass out. That was why I was to be sure to take
her. I drank the coffee and hurried with the other people toward the
bull-ring. I was not groggy now. There was only a bad headache.
Everything looked sharp and clear, and the town smelt of the early
morning.

The stretch of ground from the edge of the town to the bull-ring was
muddy. There was a crowd all along the fence that led to the ring, and
the outside balconies and the top of the bull-ring were solid with
people. I heard the rocket and I knew I could not get into the ring in
time to see the bulls come in, so I shoved through the crowd to the
fence. I was pushed close against the planks of the fence. Between the
two fences of the runway the police were clearing the crowd along. They
walked or trotted on into the bull-ring. Then people commenced to come
running. A drunk slipped and fell. Two policemen grabbed him and rushed
him over to the fence. The crowd were running fast now. There was a
great shout from the crowd, and putting my head through between the
boards I saw the bulls just coming out of the street into the long
running pen. They were going fast and gaining on the crowd. Just then
another drunk started out from the fence with a blouse in his hands. He
wanted to do capework with the bulls. The two policemen tore out,
collared him, one hit him with a club, and they dragged him against the
fence and stood flattened out against the fence as the last of the crowd
and the bulls went by. There were so many people running ahead of the
bulls that the mass thickened and slowed up going through the gate into
the ring, and as the bulls passed, galloping together, heavy,
muddy-sided, horns swinging, one shot ahead, caught a man in the running
crowd in the back and lifted him in the air. Both the man’s arms were by
his sides, his head went back as the horn went in, and the bull lifted
him and then dropped him. The bull picked another man running in front,
but the man disappeared into the crowd, and the crowd was through the
gate and into the ring with the bulls behind them. The red door of the
ring went shut, the crowd on the outside balconies of the bull-ring were
pressing through to the inside, there was a shout, then another shout.

The man who had been gored lay face down in the trampled mud. People
climbed over the fence, and I could not see the man because the crowd
was so thick around him. From inside the ring came the shouts. Each
shout meant a charge by some bull into the crowd. You could tell by the
degree of intensity in the shout how bad a thing it was that was
happening. Then the rocket went up that meant the steers had gotten the
bulls out of the ring and into the corrals. I left the fence and started
back toward the town.

Back in the town I went to the café to have a second coffee and some
buttered toast. The waiters were sweeping out the café and mopping off
the tables. One came over and took my order.

“Anything happen at the encierro?”

“I didn’t see it all. One man was badly cogido.”

“Where?”

“Here.” I put one hand on the small of my back and the other on my
chest, where it looked as though the horn must have come through. The
waiter nodded his head and swept the crumbs from the table with his
cloth.

“Badly cogido,” he said. “All for sport. All for pleasure.”

He went away and came back with the long-handled coffee and milk pots.
He poured the milk and coffee. It came out of the long spouts in two
streams into the big cup. The waiter nodded his head.

“Badly cogido through the back,” he said. He put the pots down on the
table and sat down in the chair at the table. “A big horn wound. All for
fun. Just for fun. What do you think of that?”

“I don’t know.”

“That’s it. All for fun. Fun, you understand.”

“You’re not an aficionado?”

“Me? What are bulls? Animals. Brute animals.” He stood up and put his
hand on the small of his back. “Right through the back. A cornada right
through the back. For fun—you understand.”

He shook his head and walked away, carrying the coffee-pots. Two men
were going by in the street. The waiter shouted to them. They were
grave-looking. One shook his head. “Muerto!” he called.

The waiter nodded his head. The two men went on. They were on some
errand. The waiter came over to my table.

“You hear? Muerto. Dead. He’s dead. With a horn through him. All for
morning fun. Es muy flamenco.”

“It’s bad.”

“Not for me,” the waiter said. “No fun in that for me.”

Later in the day we learned that the man who was killed was named
Vicente Girones, and came from near Tafalla. The next day in the paper
we read that he was twenty-eight years old, and had a farm, a wife, and
two children. He had continued to come to the fiesta each year after he
was married. The next day his wife came in from Tafalla to be with the
body, and the day after there was a service in the chapel of San Fermin,
and the coffin was carried to the railway-station by members of the
dancing and drinking society of Tafalla. The drums marched ahead, and
there was music on the fifes, and behind the men who carried the coffin
walked the wife and two children. . . . Behind them marched all the
members of the dancing and drinking societies of Pamplona, Estella,
Tafalla, and Sanguesa who could stay over for the funeral. The coffin
was loaded into the baggage-car of the train, and the widow and the two
children rode, sitting, all three together, in an open third-class
railway-carriage. The train started with a jerk, and then ran smoothly,
going down grade around the edge of the plateau and out into the fields
of grain that blew in the wind on the plain on the way to Tafalla.

The bull who killed Vicente Girones was named Bocanegra, was Number 118
of the bull-breeding establishment of Sanchez Tabemo, and was killed by
Pedro Romero as the third bull of that same afternoon. His ear was cut
by popular acclamation and given to Pedro Romero, who, in turn, gave it
to Brett, who wrapped it in a handkerchief belonging to myself, and left
both ear and handkerchief, along with a number of Muratti
cigarette-stubs, shoved far back in the drawer of the bed-table that
stood beside her bed in the Hotel Montoya, in Pamplona.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Back in the hotel, the night watchman was sitting on a bench inside the
door. He had been there all night and was very sleepy. He stood up as I
came in. Three of the waitresses came in at the same time. They had been
to the morning show at the bull-ring. They went up-stairs laughing. I
followed them up-stairs and went into my room. I took off my shoes and
lay down on the bed. The window was open onto the balcony and the
sunlight was bright in the room. I did not feel sleepy. It must have
been half past three o’clock when I had gone to bed and the bands had
waked me at six. My jaw was sore on both sides. I felt it with my thumb
and fingers. That damn Cohn. He should have hit somebody the first time
he was insulted, and then gone away. He was so sure that Brett loved
him. He was going to stay, and true love would conquer all. Some one
knocked on the door.

“Come in.”

It was Bill and Mike. They sat down on the bed.

“Some encierro,” Bill said. “Some encierro.”

“I say, weren’t you there?” Mike asked. “Ring for some beer, Bill.”

“What a morning!” Bill said. He mopped off his face. “My God! what a
morning! And here’s old Jake. Old Jake, the human punching-bag.”

“What happened inside?”

“Good God!” Bill said, “what happened, Mike?”

“There were these bulls coming in,” Mike said. “Just ahead of them was
the crowd, and some chap tripped and brought the whole lot of them
down.”

“And the bulls all came in right over them,” Bill said.

“I heard them yell.”

“That was Edna,” Bill said.

“Chaps kept coming out and waving their shirts.”

“One bull went along the barrera and hooked everybody over.”

“They took about twenty chaps to the infirmary,” Mike said.

“What a morning!” Bill said. “The damn police kept arresting chaps that
wanted to go and commit suicide with the bulls.”

“The steers took them in, in the end,” Mike said.

“It took about an hour.”

“It was really about a quarter of an hour,” Mike objected.

“Oh, go to hell,” Bill said. “You’ve been in the war. It was two hours
and a half for me.”

“Where’s that beer?” Mike asked.

“What did you do with the lovely Edna?”

“We took her home just now. She’s gone to bed.”

“How did she like it?”

“Fine. We told her it was just like that every morning.”

“She was impressed,” Mike said.

“She wanted us to go down in the ring, too,” Bill said. “She likes
action.”

“I said it wouldn’t be fair to my creditors,” Mike said.

“What a morning,” Bill said. “And what a night!”

“How’s your jaw, Jake?” Mike asked.

“Sore,” I said.

Bill laughed.

“Why didn’t you hit him with a chair?”

“You can talk,” Mike said. “He’d have knocked you out, too. I never saw
him hit me. I rather think I saw him just before, and then quite
suddenly I was sitting down in the street, and Jake was lying under a
table.”

“Where did he go afterward?” I asked.

“Here she is,” Mike said. “Here’s the beautiful lady with the beer.”

The chambermaid put the tray with the beer-bottles and glasses down on
the table.

“Now bring up three more bottles,” Mike said.

“Where did Cohn go after he hit me?” I asked Bill.

“Don’t you know about that?” Mike was opening a beer-bottle. He poured
the beer into one of the glasses, holding the glass close to the bottle.

“Really?” Bill asked.

“Why he went in and found Brett and the bull-fighter chap in the
bull-fighter’s room, and then he massacred the poor, bloody
bull-fighter.”

“No.”

“Yes.”

“What a night!” Bill said.

“He nearly killed the poor, bloody bull-fighter. Then Cohn wanted to
take Brett away. Wanted to make an honest woman of her, I imagine.
Damned touching scene.”

He took a long drink of the beer.

“He is an ass.”

“What happened?”

“Brett gave him what for. She told him off. I think she was rather
good.”

“I’ll bet she was,” Bill said.

“Then Cohn broke down and cried, and wanted to shake hands with the
bull-fighter fellow. He wanted to shake hands with Brett, too.”

“I know. He shook hands with me.”

“Did he? Well, they weren’t having any of it. The bull-fighter fellow
was rather good. He didn’t say much, but he kept getting up and getting
knocked down again. Cohn couldn’t knock him out. It must have been
damned funny.”

“Where did you hear all this?”

“Brett. I saw her this morning.”

“What happened finally?”

“It seems the bull-fighter fellow was sitting on the bed. He’d been
knocked down about fifteen times, and he wanted to fight some more.
Brett held him and wouldn’t let him get up. He was weak, but Brett
couldn’t hold him, and he got up. Then Cohn said he wouldn’t hit him
again. Said he couldn’t do it. Said it would be wicked. So the
bull-fighter chap sort of rather staggered over to him. Cohn went back
against the wall.

“‘So you won’t hit me?’

“‘No,’ said Cohn. ‘I’d be ashamed to.’

“So the bull-fighter fellow hit him just as hard as he could in the
face, and then sat down on the floor. He couldn’t get up, Brett said.
Cohn wanted to pick him up and carry him to the bed. He said if Cohn
helped him he’d kill him, and he’d kill him anyway this morning if Cohn
wasn’t out of town. Cohn was crying, and Brett had told him off, and he
wanted to shake hands. I’ve told you that before.”

“Tell the rest,” Bill said.

“It seems the bull-fighter chap was sitting on the floor. He was waiting
to get strength enough to get up and hit Cohn again. Brett wasn’t having
any shaking hands, and Cohn was crying and telling her how much he loved
her, and she was telling him not to be a ruddy ass. Then Cohn leaned
down to shake hands with the bull-fighter fellow. No hard feelings, you
know. All for forgiveness. And the bull-fighter chap hit him in the face
again.”

“That’s quite a kid,” Bill said.

“He ruined Cohn,” Mike said. “You know I don’t think Cohn will ever want
to knock people about again.”

“When did you see Brett?”

“This morning. She came in to get some things. She’s looking after this
Romero lad.”

He poured out another bottle of beer.

“Brett’s rather cut up. But she loves looking after people. That’s how
we came to go off together. She was looking after me.”

“I know,” I said.

“I’m rather drunk,” Mike said. “I think I’ll _stay_ rather drunk. This
is all awfully amusing, but it’s not too pleasant. It’s not too pleasant
for me.”

He drank off the beer.

“I gave Brett what for, you know. I said if she would go about with Jews
and bull-fighters and such people, she must expect trouble.” He leaned
forward. “I say, Jake, do you mind if I drink that bottle of yours?
She’ll bring you another one.”

“Please,” I said. “I wasn’t drinking it, anyway.”

Mike started to open the bottle. “Would you mind opening it?” I pressed
up the wire fastener and poured it for him.

“You know,” Mike went on, “Brett was rather good. She’s always rather
good. I gave her a fearful hiding about Jews and bull-fighters, and all
those sort of people, and do you know what she said: ‘Yes. I’ve had such
a hell of a happy life with the British aristocracy!’”

He took a drink.

“That was rather good. Ashley, chap she got the title from, was a
sailor, you know. Ninth baronet. When he came home he wouldn’t sleep in
a bed. Always made Brett sleep on the floor. Finally, when he got really
bad, he used to tell her he’d kill her. Always slept with a loaded
service revolver. Brett used to take the shells out when he’d gone to
sleep. She hasn’t had an absolutely happy life. Brett. Damned shame,
too. She enjoys things so.”

He stood up. His hand was shaky.

“I’m going in the room. Try and get a little sleep.”

He smiled.

“We go too long without sleep in these fiestas. I’m going to start now
and get plenty of sleep. Damn bad thing not to get sleep. Makes you
frightfully nervy.”

“We’ll see you at noon at the Iruña,” Bill said.

Mike went out the door. We heard him in the next room.

He rang the bell and the chambermaid came and knocked at the door.

“Bring up half a dozen bottles of beer and a bottle of Fundador,” Mike
told her.

“Si, Señorito.”

“I’m going to bed,” Bill said. “Poor old Mike. I had a hell of a row
about him last night.”

“Where? At that Milano place?”

“Yes. There was a fellow there that had helped pay Brett and Mike out of
Cannes, once. He was damned nasty.”

“I know the story.”

“I didn’t. Nobody ought to have a right to say things about Mike.”

“That’s what makes it bad.”

“They oughtn’t to have any right. I wish to hell they didn’t have any
right. I’m going to bed.”

“Was anybody killed in the ring?”

“I don’t think so. Just badly hurt.”

“A man was killed outside in the runway.”

“Was there?” said Bill.




                                CHAPTER
                                   18


At noon we were all at the café. It was crowded. We were eating shrimps
and drinking beer. The town was crowded. Every street was full. Big
motor-cars from Biarritz and San Sebastian kept driving up and parking
around the square. They brought people for the bull-fight. Sight-seeing
cars came up, too. There was one with twenty-five Englishwomen in it.
They sat in the big, white car and looked through their glasses at the
fiesta. The dancers were all quite drunk. It was the last day of the
fiesta.

The fiesta was solid and unbroken, but the motor-cars and tourist-cars
made little islands of onlookers. When the cars emptied, the onlookers
were absorbed into the crowd. You did not see them again except as sport
clothes, odd-looking at a table among the closely packed peasants in
black smocks. The fiesta absorbed even the Biarritz English so that you
did not see them unless you passed close to a table. All the time there
was music in the street. The drums kept on pounding and the pipes were
going. Inside the cafés men with their hands gripping the table, or on
each other’s shoulders, were singing the hard-voiced singing.

“Here comes Brett,” Bill said.

I looked and saw her coming through the crowd in the square, walking,
her head up, as though the fiesta were being staged in her honor, and
she found it pleasant and amusing.

“Hello, you chaps!” she said. “I say, I _have_ a thirst.”

“Get another big beer,” Bill said to the waiter.

“Shrimps?”

“Is Cohn gone?” Brett asked.

“Yes,” Bill said. “He hired a car.”

The beer came. Brett started to lift the glass mug and her hand shook.
She saw it and smiled, and leaned forward and took a long sip.

“Good beer.”

“Very good,” I said. I was nervous about Mike. I did not think he had
slept. He must have been drinking all the time, but he seemed to be
under control.

“I heard Cohn had hurt you, Jake,” Brett said.

“No. Knocked me out. That was all.”

“I say, he did hurt Pedro Romero,” Brett said. “He hurt him most badly.”

“How is he?”

“He’ll be all right. He won’t go out of the room.”

“Does he look badly?”

“Very. He was really hurt. I told him I wanted to pop out and see you
chaps for a minute.”

“Is he going to fight?”

“Rather. I’m going with you, if you don’t mind.”

“How’s your boy friend?” Mike asked. He had not listened to anything
that Brett had said.

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” he said. “She had a Jew named Cohn, but he
turned out badly.”

Brett stood up.

“I am not going to listen to that sort of rot from you, Michael.”

“How’s your boy friend?”

“Damned well,” Brett said. “Watch him this afternoon.”

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” Mike said. “A beautiful, bloody
bull-fighter.”

“Would you mind walking over with me? I want to talk to you, Jake.”

“Tell him all about your bull-fighter,” Mike said. “Oh, to hell with
your bull-fighter!” He tipped the table so that all the beers and the
dish of shrimps went over in a crash.

“Come on,” Brett said. “Let’s get out of this.”

In the crowd crossing the square I said: “How is it?”

“I’m not going to see him after lunch until the fight. His people come
in and dress him. They’re very angry about me, he says.”

Brett was radiant. She was happy. The sun was out and the day was
bright.

“I feel altogether changed,” Brett said. “You’ve no idea, Jake.”

“Anything you want me to do?”

“No, just go to the fight with me.”

“We’ll see you at lunch?”

“No. I’m eating with him.”

We were standing under the arcade at the door of the hotel. They were
carrying tables out and setting them up under the arcade.

“Want to take a turn out to the park?” Brett asked. “I don’t want to go
up yet. I fancy he’s sleeping.”

We walked along past the theatre and out of the square and along through
the barracks of the fair, moving with the crowd between the lines of
booths. We came out on a cross-street that led to the Paseo de Sarasate.
We could see the crowd walking there, all the fashionably dressed
people. They were making the turn at the upper end of the park.

“Don’t let’s go there,” Brett said. “I don’t want staring at just now.”

We stood in the sunlight. It was hot and good after the rain and the
clouds from the sea.

“I hope the wind goes down,” Brett said. “It’s very bad for him.”

“So do I.”

“He says the bulls are all right.”

“They’re good.”

“Is that San Fermin’s?”

Brett looked at the yellow wall of the chapel.

“Yes. Where the show started on Sunday.”

“Let’s go in. Do you mind? I’d rather like to pray a little for him or
something.”

We went in through the heavy leather door that moved very lightly. It
was dark inside. Many people were praying. You saw them as your eyes
adjusted themselves to the half-light. We knelt at one of the long
wooden benches. After a little I felt Brett stiffen beside me, and saw
she was looking straight ahead.

“Come on,” she whispered throatily. “Let’s get out of here. Makes me
damned nervous.”

Outside in the hot brightness of the street Brett looked up at the
tree-tops in the wind. The praying had not been much of a success.

“Don’t know why I get so nervy in church,” Brett said. “Never does me
any good.”

We walked along.

“I’m damned bad for a religious atmosphere,” Brett said. “I’ve the wrong
type of face.

“You know,” Brett said, “I’m not worried about him at all. I just feel
happy about him.”

“Good.”

“I wish the wind would drop, though.”

“It’s liable to go down by five o’clock.”

“Let’s hope.”

“You might pray,” I laughed.

“Never does me any good. I’ve never gotten anything I prayed for. Have
you?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Oh, rot,” said Brett. “Maybe it works for some people, though. You
don’t look very religious, Jake.”

“I’m pretty religious.”

“Oh, rot,” said Brett. “Don’t start proselyting to-day. To-day’s going
to be bad enough as it is.”

It was the first time I had seen her in the old happy, careless way
since before she went off with Cohn. We were back again in front of the
hotel. All the tables were set now, and already several were filled with
people eating.

“Do look after Mike,” Brett said. “Don’t let him get too bad.”

“Your frients haff gone up-stairs,” the German maître d’hôtel said in
English. He was a continual eavesdropper. Brett turned to him:

“Thank you, so much. Have you anything else to say?”

“No, _ma’am_.”

“Good,” said Brett.

“Save us a table for three,” I said to the German. He smiled his dirty
little pink-and-white smile.

“Iss madam eating here?”

“No,” Brett said.

“Den I think a tabul for two will be enuff.”

“Don’t talk to him,” Brett said. “Mike must have been in bad shape,” she
said on the stairs. We passed Montoya on the stairs. He bowed and did
not smile.

“I’ll see you at the café,” Brett said. “Thank you, so much, Jake.”

We had stopped at the floor our rooms were on. She went straight down
the hall and into Romero’s room. She did not knock. She simply opened
the door, went in, and closed it behind her.

I stood in front of the door of Mike’s room and knocked. There was no
answer. I tried the knob and it opened. Inside the room was in great
disorder. All the bags were opened and clothing was strewn around. There
were empty bottles beside the bed. Mike lay on the bed looking like a
death mask of himself. He opened his eyes and looked at me.

“Hello, Jake,” he said very slowly. “I’m getting a lit tle sleep. I’ve
want ed a lit tle sleep for a long time.”

“Let me cover you over.”

“No. I’m quite warm.”

“Don’t go. I have n’t got ten to sleep yet.”

“You’ll sleep, Mike. Don’t worry, boy.”

“Brett’s got a bull-fighter,” Mike said. “But her Jew has gone away.”

He turned his head and looked at me.

“Damned good thing, what?”

“Yes. Now go to sleep, Mike. You ought to get some sleep.”

“I’m just start ing. I’m go ing to get a lit tle sleep.”

He shut his eyes. I went out of the room and turned the door to quietly.
Bill was in my room reading the paper.

“See Mike?”

“Yes.”

“Let’s go and eat.”

“I won’t eat down-stairs with that German head waiter. He was damned
snotty when I was getting Mike up-stairs.”

“He was snotty to us, too.”

“Let’s go out and eat in the town.”

We went down the stairs. On the stairs we passed a girl coming up with a
covered tray.

“There goes Brett’s lunch,” Bill said.

“And the kid’s,” I said.

Outside on the terrace under the arcade the German head waiter came up.
His red cheeks were shiny. He was being polite.

“I haff a tabul for two for you gentlemen,” he said.

“Go sit at it,” Bill said. We went on out across the street.

We ate at a restaurant in a side street off the square. They were all
men eating in the restaurant. It was full of smoke and drinking and
singing. The food was good and so was the wine. We did not talk much.
Afterward we went to the café and watched the fiesta come to the
boiling-point. Brett came over soon after lunch. She said she had looked
in the room and that Mike was asleep.

When the fiesta boiled over and toward the bull-ring we went with the
crowd. Brett sat at the ringside between Bill and me. Directly below us
was the callejon, the passageway between the stands and the red fence of
the barrera. Behind us the concrete stands filled solidly. Out in front,
beyond the red fence, the sand of the ring was smooth-rolled and yellow.
It looked a little heavy from the rain, but it was dry in the sun and
firm and smooth. The sword-handlers and bull-ring servants came down the
callejon carrying on their shoulders the wicker baskets of fighting
capes and muletas. They were bloodstained and compactly folded and
packed in the baskets. The sword-handlers opened the heavy leather
sword-cases so the red wrapped hilts of the sheaf of swords showed as
the leather case leaned against the fence. They unfolded the
dark-stained red flannel of the muletas and fixed batons in them to
spread the stuff and give the matador something to hold. Brett watched
it all. She was absorbed in the professional details.

“He’s his name stencilled on all the capes and muletas,” she said. “Why
do they call them muletas?”

“I don’t know.”

“I wonder if they ever launder them.”

“I don’t think so. It might spoil the color.”

“The blood must stiffen them,” Bill said.

“Funny,” Brett said. “How one doesn’t mind the blood.”

Below in the narrow passage of the callejon the sword-handlers arranged
everything. All the seats were full. Above, all the boxes were full.
There was not an empty seat except in the President’s box. When he came
in the fight would start. Across the smooth sand, in the high doorway
that led into the corrals, the bull-fighters were standing, their arms
furled in their capes, talking, waiting for the signal to march in
across the arena. Brett was watching them with the glasses.

“Here, would you like to look?”

I looked through the glasses and saw the three matadors. Romero was in
the centre, Belmonte on his left, Marcial on his right. Back of them
were their people, and behind the banderilleros, back in the passageway
and in the open space of the corral, I saw the picadors. Romero was
wearing a black suit. His tricornered hat was low down over his eyes. I
could not see his face clearly under the hat, but it looked badly
marked. He was looking straight ahead. Marcial was smoking a cigarette
guardedly, holding it in his hand. Belmonte looked ahead, his face wan
and yellow, his long wolf jaw out. He was looking at nothing. Neither he
nor Romero seemed to have anything in common with the others. They were
all alone. The President came in; there was handclapping above us in the
grand stand, and I handed the glasses to Brett. There was applause. The
music started. Brett looked through the glasses.

“Here, take them,” she said.

Through the glasses I saw Belmonte speak to Romero. Marcial straightened
up and dropped his cigarette, and, looking straight ahead, their heads
back, their free arms swinging, the three matadors walked out. Behind
them came all the procession, opening out, all striding in step, all the
capes furled, everybody with free arms swinging, and behind rode the
picadors, their pics rising like lances. Behind all came the two trains
of mules and the bull-ring servants. The matadors bowed, holding their
hats on, before the President’s box, and then came over to the barrera
below us. Pedro Romero took off his heavy gold-brocaded cape and handed
it over the fence to his sword-handler. He said something to the
sword-handler. Close below us we saw Romero’s lips were puffed, both
eyes were discolored. His face was discolored and swollen. The
sword-handler took the cape, looked up at Brett, and came over to us and
handed up the cape.

“Spread it out in front of you,” I said.

Brett leaned forward. The cape was heavy and smoothly stiff with gold.
The sword-handler looked back, shook his head, and said something. A man
beside me leaned over toward Brett.

“He doesn’t want you to spread it,” he said. “You should fold it and
keep it in your lap.”

Brett folded the heavy cape.

Romero did not look up at us. He was speaking to Belmonte. Belmonte had
sent his formal cape over to some friends. He looked across at them and
smiled, his wolf smile that was only with the mouth. Romero leaned over
the barrera and asked for the water-jug. The sword-handler brought it
and Romero poured water over the percale of his fighting-cape, and then
scuffed the lower folds in the sand with his slippered foot.

“What’s that for?” Brett asked.

“To give it weight in the wind.”

“His face looks bad,” Bill said.

“He feels very badly,” Brett said. “He should be in bed.”

The first bull was Belmonte’s. Belmonte was very good. But because he
got thirty thousand pesetas and people had stayed in line all night to
buy tickets to see him, the crowd demanded that he should be more than
very good. Belmonte’s great attraction is working close to the bull. In
bull-fighting they speak of the terrain of the bull and the terrain of
the bull-fighter. As long as a bull-fighter stays in his own terrain he
is comparatively safe. Each time he enters into the terrain of the bull
he is in great danger. Belmonte, in his best days, worked always in the
terrain of the bull. This way he gave the sensation of coming tragedy.
People went to the corrida to see Belmonte, to be given tragic
sensations, and perhaps to see the death of Belmonte. Fifteen years ago
they said if you wanted to see Belmonte you should go quickly, while he
was still alive. Since then he has killed more than a thousand bulls.
When he retired the legend grew up about how his bull-fighting had been,
and when he came out of retirement the public were disappointed because
no real man could work as close to the bulls as Belmonte was supposed to
have done, not, of course, even Belmonte.

Also Belmonte imposed conditions and insisted that his bulls should not
be too large, nor too dangerously armed with horns, and so the element
that was necessary to give the sensation of tragedy was not there, and
the public, who wanted three times as much from Belmonte, who was sick
with a fistula, as Belmonte had ever been able to give, felt defrauded
and cheated, and Belmonte’s jaw came further out in contempt, and his
face turned yellower, and he moved with greater difficulty as his pain
increased, and finally the crowd were actively against him, and he was
utterly contemptuous and indifferent. He had meant to have a great
afternoon, and instead it was an afternoon of sneers, shouted insults,
and finally a volley of cushions and pieces of bread and vegetables,
thrown down at him in the plaza where he had had his greatest triumphs.
His jaw only went further out. Sometimes he turned to smile that
toothed, long-jawed, lipless smile when he was called something
particularly insulting, and always the pain that any movement produced
grew stronger and stronger, until finally his yellow face was parchment
color, and after his second bull was dead and the throwing of bread and
cushions was over, after he had saluted the President with the same
wolf-jawed smile and contemptuous eyes, and handed his sword over the
barrera to be wiped, and put back in its case, he passed through into
the callejon and leaned on the barrera below us, his head on his arms,
not seeing, not hearing anything, only going through his pain. When he
looked up, finally, he asked for a drink of water. He swallowed a
little, rinsed his mouth, spat the water, took his cape, and went back
into the ring.

Because they were against Belmonte the public were for Romero. From the
moment he left the barrera and went toward the bull they applauded him.
Belmonte watched Romero, too, watched him always without seeming to. He
paid no attention to Marcial. Marcial was the sort of thing he knew all
about. He had come out of retirement to compete with Marcial, knowing it
was a competition gained in advance. He had expected to compete with
Marcial and the other stars of the decadence of bull-fighting, and he
knew that the sincerity of his own bull-fighting would be so set off by
the false æsthetics of the bull-fighters of the decadent period that he
would only have to be in the ring. His return from retirement had been
spoiled by Romero. Romero did always, smoothly, calmly, and beautifully,
what he, Belmonte, could only bring himself to do now sometimes. The
crowd felt it, even the people from Biarritz, even the American
ambassador saw it, finally. It was a competition that Belmonte would not
enter because it would lead only to a bad horn wound or death. Belmonte
was no longer well enough. He no longer had his greatest moments in the
bull-ring. He was not sure that there were any great moments. Things
were not the same and now life only came in flashes. He had flashes of
the old greatness with his bulls, but they were not of value because he
had discounted them in advance when he had picked the bulls out for
their safety, getting out of a motor and leaning on a fence, looking
over at the herd on the ranch of his friend the bull-breeder. So he had
two small, manageable bulls without much horns, and when he felt the
greatness again coming, just a little of it through the pain that was
always with him, it had been discounted and sold in advance, and it did
not give him a good feeling. It was the greatness, but it did not make
bull-fighting wonderful to him any more.

Pedro Romero had the greatness. He loved bull-fighting, and I think he
loved the bulls, and I think he loved Brett. Everything of which he
could control the locality he did in front of her all that afternoon.
Never once did he look up. He made it stronger that way, and did it for
himself, too, as well as for her. Because he did not look up to ask if
it pleased he did it all for himself inside, and it strengthened him,
and yet he did it for her, too. But he did not do it for her at any loss
to himself. He gained by it all through the afternoon.

His first “quite” was directly below us. The three matadors take the
bull in turn after each charge he makes at a picador. Belmonte was the
first. Marcial was the second. Then came Romero. The three of them were
standing at the left of the horse. The picador, his hat down over his
eyes, the shaft of his pic angling sharply toward the bull, kicked in
the spurs and held them and with the reins in his left hand walked the
horse forward toward the bull. The bull was watching. Seemingly he
watched the white horse, but really he watched the triangular steel
point of the pic. Romero, watching, saw the bull start to turn his head.
He did not want to charge. Romero flicked his cape so the color caught
the bull’s eye. The bull charged with the reflex, charged, and found not
the flash of color but a white horse, and a man leaned far over the
horse, shot the steel point of the long hickory shaft into the hump of
muscle on the bull’s shoulder, and pulled his horse sideways as he
pivoted on the pic, making a wound, enforcing the iron into the bull’s
shoulder, making him bleed for Belmonte.

The bull did not insist under the iron. He did not really want to get at
the horse. He turned and the group broke apart and Romero was taking him
out with his cape. He took him out softly and smoothly, and then stopped
and, standing squarely in front of the bull, offered him the cape. The
bull’s tail went up and he charged, and Romero moved his arms ahead of
the bull, wheeling, his feet firmed. The dampened, mud-weighted cape
swung open and full as a sail fills, and Romero pivoted with it just
ahead of the bull. At the end of the pass they were facing each other
again. Romero smiled. The bull wanted it again, and Romero’s cape filled
again, this time on the other side. Each time he let the bull pass so
close that the man and the bull and the cape that filled and pivoted
ahead of the bull were all one sharply etched mass. It was all so slow
and so controlled. It was as though he were rocking the bull to sleep.
He made four veronicas like that, and finished with a half-veronica that
turned his back on the bull and came away toward the applause, his hand
on his hip, his cape on his arm, and the bull watching his back going
away.

In his own bulls he was perfect. His first bull did not see well. After
the first two passes with the cape Romero knew exactly how bad the
vision was impaired. He worked accordingly. It was not brilliant
bull-fighting. It was only perfect bull-fighting. The crowd wanted the
bull changed. They made a great row. Nothing very fine could happen with
a bull that could not see the lures, but the President would not order
him replaced.

“Why don’t they change him?” Brett asked.

“They’ve paid for him. They don’t want to lose their money.”

“It’s hardly fair to Romero.”

“Watch how he handles a bull that can’t see the color.”

“It’s the sort of thing I don’t like to see.”

It was not nice to watch if you cared anything about the person who was
doing it. With the bull who could not see the colors of the capes, or
the scarlet flannel of the muleta, Romero had to make the bull consent
with his body. He had to get so close that the bull saw his body, and
would start for it, and then shift the bull’s charge to the flannel and
finish out the pass in the classic manner. The Biarritz crowd did not
like it They thought Romero was afraid, and that was why he gave that
little sidestep each time as he transferred the bull’s charge from his
own body to the flannel. They preferred Belmonte’s imitation of himself
or Marcial’s imitation of Belmonte. There were three of them in the row
behind us.

“What’s he afraid of the bull for? The bull’s so dumb he only goes after
the cloth.”

“He’s just a young bull-fighter. He hasn’t learned it yet.”

“But I thought he was fine with the cape before.”

“Probably he’s nervous now.”

Out in the centre of the ring, all alone, Romero was going on with the
same thing, getting so close that the bull could see him plainly,
offering the body, offering it again a little closer, the bull watching
dully, then so close that the bull thought he had him, offering again
and finally drawing the charge and then, just before the horns came,
giving the bull the red cloth to follow with at little, almost
imperceptible, jerk that so offended the critical judgment of the
Biarritz bull-fight experts.

“He’s going to kill now,” I said to Brett. “The bull’s still strong. He
wouldn’t wear himself out.”

Out in the centre of the ring Romero profiled in front of the bull, drew
the sword out from the folds of the muleta, rose on his toes, and
sighted along the blade. The bull charged as Romero charged. Romero’s
left hand dropped the muleta over the bull’s muzzle to blind him, his
left shoulder went forward between the horns as the sword went in, and
for just an instant he and the bull were one, Romero way out over the
bull, the right arm extended high up to where the hilt of the sword had
gone in between the bull’s shoulders. Then the figure was broken. There
was a little jolt as Romero came clear, and then he was standing, one
hand up, facing the bull, his shirt ripped out from under his sleeve,
the white blowing in the wind, and the bull, the red sword hilt tight
between his shoulders, his head going down and his legs settling.

“There he goes,” Bill said.

Romero was close enough so the bull could see him. His hand still up, he
spoke to the bull. The bull gathered himself, then his head went forward
and he went over slowly, then all over, suddenly, four feet in the air.

They handed the sword to Romero, and carrying it blade down, the muleta
in his other hand, he walked over to in front of the President’s box,
bowed, straightened, and came over to the barrera and handed over the
sword and muleta.

“Bad one,” said the sword-handler.

“He made me sweat,” said Romero. He wiped off his face. The
sword-handler handed him the water-jug. Romero wiped his lips. It hurt
him to drink out of the jug. He did not look up at us.

Marcial had a big day. They were still applauding him when Romero’s last
bull came in. It was the bull that had sprinted out and killed the man
in the morning running.

During Romero’s first bull his hurt face had been very noticeable.
Everything he did showed it. All the concentration of the awkwardly
delicate working with the bull that could not see well brought it out.
The fight with Cohn had not touched his spirit but his face had been
smashed and his body hurt. He was wiping all that out now. Each thing
that he did with this bull wiped that out a little cleaner. It was a
good bull, a big bull, and with horns, and it turned and recharged
easily and surely. He was what Romero wanted in bulls.

When he had finished his work with the muleta and was ready to kill, the
crowd made him go on. They did not want the bull killed yet, they did
not want it to be over. Romero went on. It was like a course in
bull-fighting. All the passes he linked up, all completed, all slow,
templed and smooth. There were no tricks and no mystifications. There
was no brusqueness. And each pass as it reached the summit gave you a
sudden ache inside. The crowd did not want it ever to be finished.

The bull was squared on all four feet to be killed, and Romero killed
directly below us. He killed not as he had been forced to by the last
bull, but as he wanted to. He profiled directly in front of the bull,
drew the sword out of the folds of the muleta and sighted along the
blade. The bull watched him. Romero spoke to the bull and tapped one of
his feet. The bull charged and Romero waited for the charge, the muleta
held low, sighting along the blade, his feet firm. Then without taking a
step forward, he became one with the bull, the sword was in high between
the shoulders, the bull had followed the low-swung flannel, that
disappeared as Romero lurched clear to the left, and it was over. The
bull tried to go forward, his legs commenced to settle, he swung from
side to side, hesitated, then went down on his knees, and Romero’s older
brother leaned forward behind him and drove a short knife into the
bull’s neck at the base of the horns. The first time he missed. He drove
the knife in again, and the bull went over, twitching and rigid.
Romero’s brother, holding the bull’s horn in one hand, the knife in the
other, looked up at the President’s box. Handkerchiefs were waving all
over the bull-ring. The President looked down from the box and waved his
handkerchief. The brother cut the notched black ear from the dead bull
and trotted over with it to Romero. The bull lay heavy and black on the
sand, his tongue out. Boys were running toward him from all parts of the
arena, making a little circle around him. They were starting to dance
around the bull.

Romero took the ear from his brother and held it up toward the
President. The President bowed and Romero, running to get ahead of the
crowd, came toward us. He leaned up against the barrera and gave the ear
to Brett. He nodded his head and smiled. The crowd were all about him.
Brett held down the cape.

“You liked it?” Romero called.

Brett did not say anything. They looked at each other and smiled. Brett
had the ear in her hand.

“Don’t get bloody,” Romero said, and grinned. The crowd wanted him.
Several boys shouted at Brett. The crowd was the boys, the dancers, and
the drunks. Romero turned and tried to get through the crowd. They were
all around him trying to lift him and put him on their shoulders. He
fought and twisted away, and started running, in the midst of them,
toward the exit. He did not want to be carried on people’s shoulders.
But they held him and lifted him. It was uncomfortable and his legs were
spraddled and his body was very sore. They were lifting him and all
running toward the gate. He had his hand on somebody’s shoulder. He
looked around at us apologetically. The crowd, running, went out the
gate with him.

We all three went back to the hotel. Brett went up-stairs. Bill and I
sat in the down-stairs dining-room and ate some hard-boiled eggs and
drank several bottles of beer. Belmonte came down in his street clothes
with his manager and two other men. They sat at the next table and ate.
Belmonte ate very little. They were leaving on the seven o’clock train
for Barcelona. Belmonte wore a blue-striped shirt and a dark suit, and
ate soft-boiled eggs. The others ate a big meal. Belmonte did not talk.
He only answered questions.

Bill was tired after the bull-fight. So was I. We both took a bull-fight
very hard. We sat and ate the eggs and I watched Belmonte and the people
at his table. The men with him were tough-looking and businesslike.

“Come on over to the café,” Bill said. “I want an absinthe.”

It was the last day of the fiesta. Outside it was beginning to be cloudy
again. The square was full of people and the fireworks experts were
making up their set pieces for the night and covering them over with
beech branches. Boys were watching. We passed stands of rockets with
long bamboo stems. Outside the café there was a great crowd. The music
and the dancing were going on. The giants and the dwarfs were passing.

“Where’s Edna?” I asked Bill.

“I don’t know.”

We watched the beginning of the evening of the last night of the fiesta.
The absinthe made everything seem better. I drank it without sugar in
the dripping glass, and it was pleasantly bitter.

“I feel sorry about Cohn,” Bill said. “He had an awful time.”

“Oh, to hell with Cohn,” I said.

“Where do you suppose he went?”

“Up to Paris.”

“What do you suppose he’ll do?”

“Oh, to hell with him.”

“What do you suppose he’ll do?”

“Pick up with his old girl, probably.”

“Who was his old girl?”

“Somebody named Frances.”

We had another absinthe.

“When do you go back?” I asked.

“To-morrow.”

After a little while Bill said: “Well, it was a swell fiesta.”

“Yes,” I said; “something doing all the time.”

“You wouldn’t believe it. It’s like a wonderful nightmare.”

“Sure,” I said. “I’d believe anything. Including nightmares.”

“What’s the matter? Feel low?”

“Low as hell.”

“Have another absinthe. Here, waiter! Another absinthe for this señor.”

“I feel like hell,” I said.

“Drink that,” said Bill. “Drink it slow.”

It was beginning to get dark. The fiesta was going on. I began to feel
drunk but I did not feel any better.

“How do you feel?”

“I feel like hell.”

“Have another?”

“It won’t do any good.”

“Try it. You can’t tell; maybe this is the one that gets it. Hey,
waiter! Another absinthe for this señor!”

I poured the water directly into it and stirred it instead of letting it
drip. Bill put in a lump of ice. I stirred the ice around with a spoon
in the brownish, cloudy mixture.

“How is it?”

“Fine.”

“Don’t drink it fast that way. It will make you sick.”

I set down the glass. I had not meant to drink it fast.

“I feel tight.”

“You ought to.”

“That’s what you wanted, wasn’t it?”

“Sure. Get tight. Get over your damn depression.”

“Well, I’m tight. Is that what you want?”

“Sit down.”

“I won’t sit down,” I said. “I’m going over to the hotel.”

I was very drunk. I was drunker than I ever remembered having been. At
the hotel I went up-stairs. Brett’s door was open. I put my head in the
room. Mike was sitting on the bed. He waved a bottle.

“Jake,” he said. “Come in, Jake.”

I went in and sat down. The room was unstable unless I looked at some
fixed point.

“Brett, you know. She’s gone off with the bull-fighter chap.”

“No.”

“Yes. She looked for you to say good-bye. They went on the seven o’clock
train.”

“Did they?”

“Bad thing to do,” Mike said. “She shouldn’t have done it.”

“No.”

“Have a drink? Wait while I ring for some beer.”

“I’m drunk,” I said. “I’m going in and lie down.”

“Are you blind? I was blind myself.”

“Yes,” I said, “I’m blind.”

“Well, bung-o,” Mike said. “Get some sleep, old Jake.”

I went out the door and into my own room and lay on the bed. The bed
went sailing off and I sat up in bed and looked at the wall to make it
stop. Outside in the square the fiesta was going on. It did not mean
anything. Later Bill and Mike came in to get me to go down and eat with
them. I pretended to be asleep.

“He’s asleep. Better let him alone.”

“He’s blind as a tick,” Mike said. They went out.

I got up and went to the balcony and looked out at the dancing in the
square. The world was not wheeling any more. It was just very clear and
bright, and inclined to blur at the edges. I washed, brushed my hair. I
looked strange to myself in the glass, and went down-stairs to the
dining-room.

“Here he is!” said Bill. “Good old Jake! I knew you wouldn’t pass out.”

“Hello, you old drunk,” Mike said.

“I got hungry and woke up.”

“Eat some soup,” Bill said.

The three of us sat at the table, and it seemed as though about six
people were missing.




                                BOOK III




                                CHAPTER
                                   19


In the morning it was all over. The fiesta was finished. I woke about
nine o’clock, had a bath, dressed, and went down-stairs. The square was
empty and there were no people on the streets. A few children were
picking up rocket-sticks in the square. The cafés were just opening and
the waiters were carrying out the comfortable white wicker chairs and
arranging them around the marble-topped tables in the shade of the
arcade. They were sweeping the streets and sprinkling them with a hose.

I sat in one of the wicker chairs and leaned back comfortably. The
waiter was in no hurry to come. The white-paper announcements of the
unloading of the bulls and the big schedules of special trains were
still up on the pillars of the arcade. A waiter wearing a blue apron
came out with a bucket of water and a cloth, and commenced to tear down
the notices, pulling the paper off in strips and washing and rubbing
away the paper that stuck to the stone. The fiesta was over.

I drank a coffee and after a while Bill came over. I watched him come
walking across the square. He sat down at the table and ordered a
coffee.

“Well,” he said, “it’s all over.”

“Yes,” I said. “When do you go?”

“I don’t know. We better get a car, I think. Aren’t you going back to
Paris?”

“No. I can stay away another week. I think I’ll go to San Sebastian.”

“I want to get back.”

“What’s Mike going to do?”

“He’s going to Saint Jean de Luz.”

“Let’s get a car and all go as far as Bayonne. You can get the train up
from there to-night.”

“Good. Let’s go after lunch.”

“All right. I’ll get the car.”

We had lunch and paid the bill. Montoya did not come near us. One of the
maids brought the bill. The car was outside. The chauffeur piled and
strapped the bags on top of the car and put them in beside him in the
front seat and we got in. The car went out of the square, along through
the side streets, out under the trees and down the hill and away from
Pamplona. It did not seem like a very long ride. Mike had a bottle of
Fundador. I only took a couple of drinks. We came over the mountains and
out of Spain and down the white roads and through the overfoliaged, wet,
green, Basque country, and finally into Bayonne. We left Bill’s baggage
at the station, and he bought a ticket to Paris. His train left at
seven-ten. We came out of the station. The car was standing out in
front.

“What shall we do about the car?” Bill asked.

“Oh, bother the car,” Mike said. “Let’s just keep the car with us.”

“All right,” Bill said. “Where shall we go?”

“Let’s go to Biarritz and have a drink.”

“Old Mike the spender,” Bill said.

We drove in to Biarritz and left the car outside a very Ritz place. We
went into the bar and sat on high stools and drank a whiskey and soda.

“That drink’s mine,” Mike said.

“Let’s roll for it.”

So we rolled poker dice out of a deep leather dice-cup. Bill was out
first roll. Mike lost to me and handed the bartender a hundred-franc
note. The whiskeys were twelve francs apiece. We had another round and
Mike lost again. Each time he gave the bartender a good tip. In a room
off the bar there was a good jazz band playing. It was a pleasant bar.
We had another round. I went out on the first roll with four kings. Bill
and Mike rolled. Mike won the first roll with four jacks. Bill won the
second. On the final roll Mike had three kings and let them stay. He
handed the dice-cup to Bill. Bill rattled them and rolled, and there
were three kings, an ace, and a queen.

“It’s yours, Mike,” Bill said. “Old Mike, the gambler.”

“I’m so sorry,” Mike said. “I can’t get it.”

“What’s the matter?”

“I’ve no money,” Mike said. “I’m stony. I’ve just twenty francs. Here,
take twenty francs.”

Bill’s face sort of changed.

“I just had enough to pay Montoya. Damned lucky to have it, too.”

“I’ll cash you a check,” Bill said.

“That’s damned nice of you, but you see I can’t write checks.”

“What are you going to do for money?”

“Oh, some will come through. I’ve two weeks allowance should be here. I
can live on tick at this pub in Saint Jean.”

“What do you want to do about the car?” Bill asked me. “Do you want to
keep it on?”

“It doesn’t make any difference. Seems sort of idiotic.”

“Come on, let’s have another drink,” Mike said.

“Fine. This one is on me,” Bill said. “Has Brett any money?” He turned
to Mike.

“I shouldn’t think so. She put up most of what I gave to old Montoya.”

“She hasn’t any money with her?” I asked.

“I shouldn’t think so. She never has any money. She gets five hundred
quid a year and pays three hundred and fifty of it in interest to Jews.”

“I suppose they get it at the source,” said Bill.

“Quite. They’re not really Jews. We just call them Jews. They’re
Scotsmen, I believe.”

“Hasn’t she any at all with her?” I asked.

“I hardly think so. She gave it all to me when she left.”

“Well,” Bill said, “we might as well have another drink.”

“Damned good idea,” Mike said. “One never gets anywhere by discussing
finances.”

“No,” said Bill. Bill and I rolled for the next two rounds. Bill lost
and paid. We went out to the car.

“Anywhere you’d like to go, Mike?” Bill asked.

“Let’s take a drive. It might do my credit good. Let’s drive about a
little.”

“Fine. I’d like to see the coast. Let’s drive down toward Hendaye.”

“I haven’t any credit along the coast.”

“You can’t ever tell,” said Bill.

We drove out along the coast road. There was the green of the headlands,
the white, red-roofed villas, patches of forest, and the ocean very blue
with the tide out and the water curling far out along the beach. We
drove through Saint Jean de Luz and passed through villages farther down
the coast. Back of the rolling country we were going through we saw the
mountains we had come over from Pamplona. The road went on ahead. Bill
looked at his watch. It was time for us to go back. He knocked on the
glass and told the driver to turn around. The driver backed the car out
into the grass to turn it. In back of us were the woods, below a stretch
of meadow, then the sea.

At the hotel where Mike was going to stay in Saint Jean we stopped the
car and he got out. The chauffeur carried in his bags. Mike stood by the
side of the car.

“Good-bye, you chaps,” Mike said. “It was a damned fine fiesta.”

“So long, Mike,” Bill said.

“I’ll see you around,” I said.

“Don’t worry about money,” Mike said. “You can pay for the car, Jake,
and I’ll send you my share.”

“So long, Mike.”

“So long, you chaps. You’ve been damned nice.”

We all shook hands. We waved from the car to Mike. He stood in the road
watching. We got to Bayonne just before the train left. A porter carried
Bill’s bags in from the consigne. I went as far as the inner gate to the
tracks.

“So long, fella,” Bill said.

“So long, kid!”

“It was swell. I’ve had a swell time.”

“Will you be in Paris?”

“No, I have to sail on the 17th. So long, fella!”

“So long, old kid!”

He went in through the gate to the train. The porter went ahead with the
bags. I watched the train pull out. Bill was at one of the windows. The
window passed, the rest of the train passed, and the tracks were empty.
I went outside to the car.

“How much do we owe you?” I asked the driver. The price to Bayonne had
been fixed at a hundred and fifty pesetas.

“Two hundred pesetas.”

“How much more will it be if you drive me to San Sebastian on your way
back?”

“Fifty pesetas.”

“Don’t kid me.”

“Thirty-five pesetas.”

“It’s not worth it,” I said. “Drive me to the Hotel Panier Fleuri.”

At the hotel I paid the driver and gave him a tip. The car was powdered
with dust. I rubbed the rod-case through the dust. It seemed the last
thing that connected me with Spain and the fiesta. The driver put the
car in gear and went down the street. I watched it turn off to take the
road to Spain. I went into the hotel and they gave me a room. It was the
same room I had slept in when Bill and Cohn and I were in Bayonne. That
seemed a very long time ago. I washed, changed my shirt, and went out in
the town.

At a newspaper kiosque I bought a copy of the New York _Herald_ and sat
in a café to read it. It felt strange to be in France again. There was a
safe, suburban feeling. I wished I had gone up to Paris with Bill,
except that Paris would have meant more fiesta-ing. I was through with
fiestas for a while. It would be quiet in San Sebastian. The season does
not open there until August. I could get a good hotel room and read and
swim. There was a fine beach there. There were wonderful trees along the
promenade above the beach, and there were many children sent down with
their nurses before the season opened. In the evening there would be
band concerts under the trees across from the Café Marinas. I could sit
in the Marinas and listen.

“How does one eat inside?” I asked the waiter. Inside the café was a
restaurant.

“Well. Very well. One eats very well.”

“Good.”

I went in and ate dinner. It was a big meal for France but it seemed
very carefully apportioned after Spain. I drank a bottle of wine for
company. It was a Château Margaux. It was pleasant to be drinking slowly
and to be tasting the wine and to be drinking alone. A bottle of wine
was good company. Afterward I had coffee. The waiter recommended a
Basque liqueur called Izzarra. He brought in the bottle and poured a
liqueur-glass full. He said Izzarra was made of the flowers of the
Pyrenees. The veritable flowers of the Pyrenees. It looked like hair-oil
and smelled like Italian _strega_. I told him to take the flowers of the
Pyrenees away and bring me a _vieux marc_. The _marc_ was good. I had a
second _marc_ after the coffee.

The waiter seemed a little offended about the flowers of the Pyrenees,
so I overtipped him. That made him happy. It felt comfortable to be in a
country where it is so simple to make people happy. You can never tell
whether a Spanish waiter will thank you. Everything is on such a clear
financial basis in France. It is the simplest country to live in. No one
makes things complicated by becoming your friend for any obscure reason.
If you want people to like you you have only to spend a little money. I
spent a little money and the waiter liked me. He appreciated my valuable
qualities. He would be glad to see me back. I would dine there again
some time and he would be glad to see me, and would want me at his
table. It would be a sincere liking because it would have a sound basis.
I was back in France.

Next morning I tipped every one a little too much at the hotel to make
more friends, and left on the morning train for San Sebastian. At the
station I did not tip the porter more than I should because I did not
think I would ever see him again. I only wanted a few good French
friends in Bayonne to make me welcome in case I should come back there
again. I knew that if they remembered me their friendship would be
loyal.

At Irun we had to change trains and show passports. I hated to leave
France. Life was so simple in France. I felt I was a fool to be going
back into Spain. In Spain you could not tell about anything. I felt like
a fool to be going back into it, but I stood in line with my passport,
opened my bags for the customs, bought a ticket, went through a gate,
climbed onto the train, and after forty minutes and eight tunnels I was
at San Sebastian.

Even on a hot day San Sebastian has a certain early-morning quality. The
trees seem as though their leaves were never quite dry. The streets feel
as though they had just been sprinkled. It is always cool and shady on
certain streets on the hottest day. I went to a hotel in the town where
I had stopped before, and they gave me a room with a balcony that opened
out above the roofs of the town. There was a green mountainside beyond
the roofs.

I unpacked my bags and stacked my books on the table beside the head of
the bed, put out my shaving things, hung up some clothes in the big
armoire, and made up a bundle for the laundry. Then I took a shower in
the bathroom and went down to lunch. Spain had not changed to
summer-time, so I was early. I set my watch again. I had recovered an
hour by coming to San Sebastian.

As I went into the dining-room the concierge brought me a police
bulletin to fill out. I signed it and asked him for two telegraph forms,
and wrote a message to the Hotel Montoya, telling them to forward all
mail and telegrams for me to this address. I calculated how many days I
would be in San Sebastian and then wrote out a wire to the office asking
them to hold mail, but forward all wires for me to San Sebastian for six
days. Then I went in and had lunch.

After lunch I went up to my room, read a while, and went to sleep. When
I woke it was half past four. I found my swimming-suit, wrapped it with
a comb in a towel, and went down-stairs and walked up the street to the
Concha. The tide was about half-way out. The beach was smooth and firm,
and the sand yellow. I went into a bathing-cabin, undressed, put on my
suit, and walked across the smooth sand to the sea. The sand was warm
under bare feet. There were quite a few people in the water and on the
beach. Out beyond where the headlands of the Concha almost met to form
the harbor there was a white line of breakers and the open sea. Although
the tide was going out, there were a few slow rollers. They came in like
undulations in the water, gathered weight of water, and then broke
smoothly on the warm sand. I waded out. The water was cold. As a roller
came I dove, swam out under water, and came to the surface with all the
chill gone. I swam out to the raft, pulled myself up, and lay on the hot
planks. A boy and girl were at the other end. The girl had undone the
top strap of her bathing-suit and was browning her back. The boy lay
face downward on the raft and talked to her. She laughed at things he
said, and turned her brown back in the sun. I lay on the raft in the sun
until I was dry. Then I tried several dives. I dove deep once, swimming
down to the bottom. I swam with my eyes open and it was green and dark.
The raft made a dark shadow. I came out of water beside the raft, pulled
up, dove once more, holding it for length, and then swam ashore. I lay
on the beach until I was dry, then went into the bathing-cabin, took off
my suit, sloshed myself with fresh water, and rubbed dry.

I walked around the harbor under the trees to the casino, and then up
one of the cool streets to the Café Marinas. There was an orchestra
playing inside the café and I sat out on the terrace and enjoyed the
fresh coolness in the hot day, and had a glass of lemon-juice and shaved
ice and then a long whiskey and soda. I sat in front of the Marinas for
a long time and read and watched the people, and listened to the music.

Later when it began to get dark, I walked around the harbor and out
along the promenade, and finally back to the hotel for supper. There was
a bicycle-race on, the Tour du Pays Basque, and the riders were stopping
that night in San Sebastian. In the dining-room, at one side, there was
a long table of bicycle-riders, eating with their trainers and managers.
They were all French and Belgians, and paid close attention to their
meal, but they were having a good time. At the head of the table were
two good-looking French girls, with much Rue du Faubourg Montmartre
chic. I could not make out whom they belonged to. They all spoke in
slang at the long table and there were many private jokes and some jokes
at the far end that were not repeated when the girls asked to hear them.
The next morning at five o’clock the race resumed with the last lap, San
Sebastian-Bilbao. The bicycle-riders drank much wine, and were burned
and browned by the sun. They did not take the race seriously except
among themselves. They had raced among themselves so often that it did
not make much difference who won. Especially in a foreign country. The
money could be arranged.

The man who had a matter of two minutes lead in the race had an attack
of boils, which were very painful. He sat on the small of his back. His
neck was very red and the blond hairs were sunburned. The other riders
joked him about his boils. He tapped on the table with his fork.

“Listen,” he said, “to-morrow my nose is so tight on the handle-bars
that the only thing touches those boils is a lovely breeze.”

One of the girls looked at him down the table, and he grinned and turned
red. The Spaniards, they said, did not know how to pedal.

I had coffee out on the terrasse with the team manager of one of the big
bicycle manufacturers. He said it had been a very pleasant race, and
would have been worth watching if Bottechia had not abandoned it at
Pamplona. The dust had been bad, but in Spain the roads were better than
in France. Bicycle road-racing was the only sport in the world, he said.
Had I ever followed the Tour de France? Only in the papers. The Tour de
France was the greatest sporting event in the world. Following and
organizing the road races had made him know France. Few people know
France. All spring and all summer and all fall he spent on the road with
bicycle road-racers. Look at the number of motor-cars now that followed
the riders from town to town in a road race. It was a rich country and
more _sportif_ every year. It would be the most _sportif_ country in the
world. It was bicycle road-racing did it. That and football. He knew
France. _La France Sportive._ He knew road-racing. We had a cognac.
After all, though, it wasn’t bad to get back to Paris. There is only one
Paname. In all the world, that is. Paris is the town the most _sportif_
in the world. Did I know the _Chope de Negre_? Did I not. I would see
him there some time. I certainly would. We would drink another _fine_
together. We certainly would. They started at six o’clock less a quarter
in the morning. Would I be up for the depart? I would certainly try to.
Would I like him to call me? It was very interesting. I would leave a
call at the desk. He would not mind calling me. I could not let him take
the trouble. I would leave a call at the desk. We said good-bye until
the next morning.

In the morning when I awoke the bicycle-riders and their following cars
had been on the road for three hours. I had coffee and the papers in bed
and then dressed and took my bathing-suit down to the beach. Everything
was fresh and cool and damp in the early morning. Nurses in uniform and
in peasant costume walked under the trees with children. The Spanish
children were beautiful. Some bootblacks sat together under a tree
talking to a soldier. The soldier had only one arm. The tide was in and
there was a good breeze and a surf on the beach.

I undressed in one of the bath-cabins, crossed the narrow line of beach
and went into the water. I swam out, trying to swim through the rollers,
but having to dive sometimes. Then in the quiet water I turned and
floated. Floating I saw only the sky, and felt the drop and lift of the
swells. I swam back to the surf and coasted in, face down, on a big
roller, then turned and swam, trying to keep in the trough and not have
a wave break over me. It made me tired, swimming in the trough, and I
turned and swam out to the raft. The water was buoyant and cold. It felt
as though you could never sink. I swam slowly, it seemed like a long
swim with the high tide, and then pulled up on the raft and sat,
dripping, on the boards that were becoming hot in the sun. I looked
around at the bay, the old town, the casino, the line of trees along the
promenade, and the big hotels with their white porches and gold-lettered
names. Off on the right, almost closing the harbor, was a green hill
with a castle. The raft rocked with the motion of the water. On the
other side of the narrow gap that led into the open sea was another high
headland. I thought I would like to swim across the bay but I was afraid
of cramp.

I sat in the sun and watched the bathers on the beach. They looked very
small. After a while I stood up, gripped with my toes on the edge of the
raft as it tipped with my weight, and dove cleanly and deeply, to come
up through the lightening water, blew the salt water out of my head, and
swam slowly and steadily in to shore.

After I was dressed and had paid for the bath-cabin, I walked back to
the hotel. The bicycle-racers had left several copies of _L’Auto_
around, and I gathered them up in the reading-room and took them out and
sat in an easy chair in the sun to read about and catch up on French
sporting life. While I was sitting there the concierge came out with a
blue envelope in his hand.

“A telegram for you, sir.”

I poked my finger along under the fold that was fastened down, spread it
open, and read it. It had been forwarded from Paris:

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

I tipped the concierge and read the message again. A postman was coming
along the sidewalk. He turned in the hotel. He had a big moustache and
looked very military. He came out of the hotel again. The concierge was
just behind him.

“Here’s another telegram for you, sir.”

“Thank you,” I said.

I opened it. It was forwarded from Pamplona.

                  COULD YOU COME HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                  AM RATHER IN TROUBLE BRETT.

The concierge stood there waiting for another tip, probably.

“What time is there a train for Madrid?”

“It left at nine this morning. There is a slow train at eleven, and the
Sud Express at ten to-night.”

“Get me a berth on the Sud Express. Do you want the money now?”

“Just as you wish,” he said. “I will have it put on the bill.”

“Do that.”

Well, that meant San Sebastian all shot to hell. I suppose, vaguely, I
had expected something of the sort. I saw the concierge standing in the
doorway.

“Bring me a telegram form, please.”

He brought it and I took out my fountain-pen and printed:

                   LADY ASHLEY HOTEL MONTANA MADRID
                   ARRIVING SUD EXPRESS TOMORROW LOVE
                   JAKE.

That seemed to handle it. That was it. Send a girl off with one man.
Introduce her to another to go off with him. Now go and bring her back.
And sign the wire with love. That was it all right. I went in to lunch.

I did not sleep much that night on the Sud Express. In the morning I had
breakfast in the dining-car and watched the rock and pine country
between Avila and Escorial. I saw the Escorial out of the window, gray
and long and cold in the sun, and did not give a damn about it. I saw
Madrid come up over the plain, a compact white sky-line on the top of a
little cliff away off across the sun-hardened country.

The Norte station in Madrid is the end of the line. All trains finish
there. They don’t go on anywhere. Outside were cabs and taxis and a line
of hotel runners. It was like a country town. I took a taxi and we
climbed up through the gardens, by the empty palace and the unfinished
church on the edge of the cliff, and on up until we were in the high,
hot, modern town. The taxi coasted down a smooth street to the Puerta
del Sol, and then through the traffic and out into the Carrera San
Jeronimo. All the shops had their awnings down against the heat. The
windows on the sunny side of the street were shuttered. The taxi stopped
at the curb. I saw the sign HOTEL MONTANA on the second floor. The
taxi-driver carried the bags in and left them by the elevator. I could
not make the elevator work, so I walked up. On the second floor up was a
cut brass sign: HOTEL MONTANA. I rang and no one came to the door. I
rang again and a maid with a sullen face opened the door.

“Is Lady Ashley here?” I asked.

She looked at me dully.

“Is an Englishwoman here?”

She turned and called some one inside. A very fat woman came to the
door. Her hair was gray and stiffly oiled in scallops around her face.
She was short and commanding.

“Muy buenos,” I said. “Is there an Englishwoman here? I would like to
see this English lady.”

“Muy buenos. Yes, there is a female English. Certainly you can see her
if she wishes to see you.”

“She wishes to see me.”

“The chica will ask her.”

“It is very hot.”

“It is very hot in the summer in Madrid.”

“And how cold in winter.”

“Yes, it is very cold in winter.”

Did I want to stay myself in person in the Hotel Montana?

Of that as yet I was undecided, but it would give me pleasure if my bags
were brought up from the ground floor in order that they might not be
stolen. Nothing was ever stolen in the Hotel Montana. In other fondas,
yes. Not here. No. The personages of this establishment were rigidly
selectioned. I was happy to hear it. Nevertheless I would welcome the
upbringal of my bags.

The maid came in and said that the female English wanted to see the male
English now, at once.

“Good,” I said. “You see. It is as I said.”

“Clearly.”

I followed the maid’s back down a long, dark corridor. At the end she
knocked on a door.

“Hello,” said Brett. “Is it you, Jake?”

“It’s me.”

“Come in. Come in.”

I opened the door. The maid closed it after me. Brett was in bed. She
had just been brushing her hair and held the brush in her hand. The room
was in that disorder produced only by those who have always had
servants.

“Darling!” Brett said.

I went over to the bed and put my arms around her. She kissed me, and
while she kissed me I could feel she was thinking of something else. She
was trembling in my arms. She felt very small.

“Darling! I’ve had such a hell of a time.”

“Tell me about it.”

“Nothing to tell. He only left yesterday. I made him go.”

“Why didn’t you keep him?”

“I don’t know. It isn’t the sort of thing one does. I don’t think I hurt
him any.”

“You were probably damn good for him.”

“He shouldn’t be living with any one. I realized that right away.”

“No.”

“Oh, hell!” she said, “let’s not talk about it. Let’s never talk about
it.”

“All right.”

“It was rather a knock his being ashamed of me. He was ashamed of me for
a while, you know.”

“No.”

“Oh, yes. They ragged him about me at the café, I guess. He wanted me to
grow my hair out. Me, with long hair. I’d look so like hell.”

“It’s funny.”

“He said it would make me more womanly. I’d look a fright.”

“What happened?”

“Oh, he got over that. He wasn’t ashamed of me long.”

“What was it about being in trouble?”

“I didn’t know whether I could make him go, and I didn’t have a sou to
go away and leave him. He tried to give me a lot of money, you know. I
told him I had scads of it. He knew that was a lie. I couldn’t take his
money, you know.”

“No.”

“Oh, let’s not talk about it. There were some funny things, though. Do
give me a cigarette.”

I lit the cigarette.

“He learned his English as a waiter in Gib.”

“Yes.”

“He wanted to marry me, finally.”

“Really?”

“Of course. I can’t even marry Mike.”

“Maybe he thought that would make him Lord Ashley.”

“No. It wasn’t that. He really wanted to marry me. So I couldn’t go away
from him, he said. He wanted to make it sure I could never go away from
him. After I’d gotten more womanly, of course.”

“You ought to feel set up.”

“I do. I’m all right again. He’s wiped out that damned Cohn.”

“Good.”

“You know I’d have lived with him if I hadn’t seen it was bad for him.
We got along damned well.”

“Outside of your personal appearance.”

“Oh, he’d have gotten used to that.”

She put out the cigarette.

“I’m thirty-four, you know. I’m not going to be one of these bitches
that ruins children.”

“No.”

“I’m not going to be that way. I feel rather good, you know. I feel
rather set up.”

“Good.”

She looked away. I thought she was looking for another cigarette. Then I
saw she was crying. I could feel her crying. Shaking and crying. She
wouldn’t look up. I put my arms around her.

“Don’t let’s ever talk about it. Please don’t let’s ever talk about it.”

“Dear Brett.”

“I’m going back to Mike.” I could feel her crying as I held her close.
“He’s so damned nice and he’s so awful. He’s my sort of thing.”

She would not look up. I stroked her hair. I could feel her shaking.

“I won’t be one of those bitches,” she said. “But, oh, Jake, please
let’s never talk about it.”

We left the Hotel Montana. The woman who ran the hotel would not let me
pay the bill. The bill had been paid.

“Oh, well. Let it go,” Brett said. “It doesn’t matter now.”

We rode in a taxi down to the Palace Hotel, left the bags, arranged for
berths on the Sud Express for the night, and went into the bar of the
hotel for a cocktail. We sat on high stools at the bar while the barman
shook the Martinis in a large nickelled shaker.

“It’s funny what a wonderful gentility you get in the bar of a big
hotel,” I said.

“Barmen and jockeys are the only people who are polite any more.”

“No matter how vulgar a hotel is, the bar is always nice.”

“It’s odd.”

“Bartenders have always been fine.”

“You know,” Brett said, “it’s quite true. He is only nineteen. Isn’t it
amazing?”

We touched the two glasses as they stood side by side on the bar. They
were coldly beaded. Outside the curtained window was the summer heat of
Madrid.

“I like an olive in a Martini,” I said to the barman.

“Right you are, sir. There you are.”

“Thanks.”

“I should have asked, you know.”

The barman went far enough up the bar so that he would not hear our
conversation. Brett had sipped from the Martini as it stood, on the
wood. Then she picked it up. Her hand was steady enough to lift it after
that first sip.

“It’s good. Isn’t it a nice bar?”

“They’re all nice bars.”

“You know I didn’t believe it at first. He was born in 1905. I was in
school in Paris, then. Think of that.”

“Anything you want me to think about it?”

“Don’t be an ass. _Would_ you buy a lady a drink?”

“We’ll have two more Martinis.”

“As they were before, sir?”

“They were very good.” Brett smiled at him.

“Thank you, ma’am.”

“Well, bung-o,” Brett said.

“Bung-o!”

“You know,” Brett said, “he’d only been with two women before. He never
cared about anything but bull-fighting.”

“He’s got plenty of time.”

“I don’t know. He thinks it was me. Not the show in general.”

“Well, it was you.”

“Yes. It was me.”

“I thought you weren’t going to ever talk about it.”

“How can I help it?”

“You’ll lose it if you talk about it.”

“I just talk around it. You know I feel rather damned good, Jake.”

“You should.”

“You know it makes one feel rather good deciding not to be a bitch.”

“Yes.”

“It’s sort of what we have instead of God.”

“Some people have God,” I said. “Quite a lot.”

“He never worked very well with me.”

“Should we have another Martini?”

The barman shook up two more Martinis and poured them out into fresh
glasses.

“Where will we have lunch?” I asked Brett. The bar was cool. You could
feel the heat outside through the window.

“Here?” asked Brett.

“It’s rotten here in the hotel. Do you know a place called Botin’s?” I
asked the barman.

“Yes, sir. Would you like to have me write out the address?”

“Thank you.”

We lunched up-stairs at Botin’s. It is one of the best restaurants in
the world. We had roast young suckling pig and drank _rioja_ _alta_.
Brett did not eat much. She never ate much. I ate a very big meal and
drank three bottles of _rioja alta_.

“How do you feel, Jake?” Brett asked. “My God! what a meal you’ve
eaten.”

“I feel fine. Do you want a dessert?”

“Lord, no.”

Brett was smoking.

“You like to eat, don’t you?” she said.

“Yes.” I said. “I like to do a lot of things.”

“What do you like to do?”

“Oh,” I said, “I like to do a lot of things. Don’t you want a dessert?”

“You asked me that once,” Brett said.

“Yes,” I said. “So I did. Let’s have another bottle of _rioja alta_.”

“It’s very good.”

“You haven’t drunk much of it,” I said.

“I have. You haven’t seen.”

“Let’s get two bottles,” I said. The bottles came. I poured a little in
my glass, then a glass for Brett, then filled my glass. We touched
glasses.

“Bung-o!” Brett said. I drank my glass and poured out another. Brett put
her hand on my arm.

“Don’t get drunk, Jake,” she said. “You don’t have to.”

“How do you know?”

“Don’t,” she said. “You’ll be all right.”

“I’m not getting drunk,” I said. “I’m just drinking a little wine. I
like to drink wine.”

“Don’t get drunk,” she said. “Jake, don’t get drunk.”

“Want to go for a ride?” I said. “Want to ride through the town?”

“Right,” Brett said. “I haven’t seen Madrid. I should see Madrid.”

“I’ll finish this,” I said.

Down-stairs we came out through the first-floor dining-room to the
street. A waiter went for a taxi. It was hot and bright. Up the street
was a little square with trees and grass where there were taxis parked.
A taxi came up the street, the waiter hanging out at the side. I tipped
him and told the driver where to drive, and got in beside Brett. The
driver started up the street. I settled back. Brett moved close to me.
We sat close against each other. I put my arm around her and she rested
against me comfortably. It was very hot and bright, and the houses
looked sharply white. We turned out onto the Gran Via.

“Oh, Jake,” Brett said, “we could have had such a damned good time
together.”

Ahead was a mounted policeman in khaki directing traffic. He raised his
baton. The car slowed suddenly pressing Brett against me.

“Yes,” I said. “Isn’t it pretty to think so?”

                                THE END







CHAPTER I 


In the late summer of that year we lived in a house in a 
village that looked across the river and the plain to the 
mountains. In the bed of the river there were pebbles and 
boulders, dry and white in the sun, and the water was 
clear and swiftly moving and blue in the channels. Troops 
went by the house and down the road and the dust they 
raised powdered the leaves of the trees. The trunks of the 
trees too were dusty and the leaves fell early that year and 
we saw the troops marching along the road and the dust 
rising and leaves, stirred by the breeze, falling and the 
soldiers marching and afterwards the road bare and white 
except for the leaves. 

The plain was rich with crops; there w’'ere many 
orchards of fruit trees and beyond the plain the mountains 
were brown and bare. There was fighting in the moun- 
tains and at night we could see the flashes from the 
artillery. In the dark it was like summer lightning, but 
the nights were cool and there was not the feeling of a 
storm coming. 

Sometimes in the dark we heard the troops marching 
under the window and guns going past pulled by motor- 
tractors. There was much traffic at night and many mules 
on the roads with boxes of ammunition on each side of 
their pack-saddles and grey motor-trucks that carried men, 
and other trucks with loads covered with canvas that 
moved slower in the traffic. There were big guns too that 
passed in the day drawn by tractors, the long barrels of 

II 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


the guns covered with green branches and green leafy 
branches and vines laid over the tractors. To the north 
we could look across a valley and see a forest of chestnut 
trees and behind it another mountain on this side of the 
river. There was fighting for that mountain too, but it 
was not successful, and in the fall when the rains came 
the leaves all fell from the chestnut trees and the branches 
were bare and the trunks black with rain. The vineyards 
were thin and bare-branched too and all the country wet 
and brown and dead with the autumn. There were mists 
over the river and clouds on the mountain and the trucks 
splashed mud on the roads and the troops were muddy and 
wet in their capes; their rifles were wet and under their 
capes the two leather cartridge-boxes on the front of the 
belts, grey leather boxes heavy with the packs of clips of 
thin, long 6.5 mm. cartridges, bulged forward under the 
capes so that the men, passing on the road, marched as 
though they were six months gone with child. 

There were small grey motor-cars that passed going 
very fast; usually there was an officer on the seat with the 
driver and more officers in the back seat. They splashed 
more mud than the camions even and if one of the officers 
in the back was very small and sitting between two 
generals, he himself so small that you could not see his 
face but only the top of his cap and his narrow back, and if 
the car went especially fast it was probably the King. 
He lived in Udine and came out in this w^ay nearly every 
day to see how tilings were going, and things went very 
badly. 

At the start of the winter came the permanent rain and 
with the rain came the cholera. But it was checked and 
in the end only seven thousand died of it in the army. 

12 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 2 

The next year there were many victories. The mountain 
that was beyond the valley and the hillside where the 
chestnut forest grew was captured and there were 
victories beyond the plain on the plateau to the south and 
we crossed the river in August and lived in a house in 
Gorizia that had a fountain and many thick shady trees in 
a walled garden and a wistaria vine purple on the side of 
the house. Now the fighting was in the next mountains 
beyond and was not a mile away. The town was very nice 
and our house was very fine. The river ran behind us and 
the town had been captured very handsomely but the 
mountains beyond it could not be taken and I was very 
glad the Austrians seemed to want to come back to the 
town some time, if the war should end, because they did 
not bombard it to destroy it but only a little in a military 
way. People lived on in it and there were hospitals and 
cafes and artillery up side streets and two bawdy-houses, 
one for troops and one for officers, and with the end of the 
summer, the cool nights, the fighting in the mountains 
beyond the town, the shell-marked iron of the railway 
bridge, the smashed tunnel by the river where the fighting 
had been, the trees around the square and the long avenue 
of trees that led to the square; these with there being girls 
in the town, the King passing in his motor-car, sometimes 
now seeing his face and little long-necked body and grey 
beard like a goat’s chin-tuft; all these with the sudden 
interiors of houses that had lost a wall through shelling, 
with plaster and rubble in their gardens and sometimes 
in the street, and the whole thing going well on the Carso 

13 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


made the fall very different from the last fall when we 
had been in the country. The war was changed too. 

The forest of oak trees on the mountain beyond the 
town was gone. The forest had been green in the summer 
when we had come into the town but now there were the 
stumps and the broken trunks and the ground torn up, 
and one day at the end of the fall when I was out where 
the oak forest had been I saw a cloud coming over the 
mountain. It came very fast and the sun went a dull 
yellow and then everything was grey and the sky was 
covered and the cloud came on down the mountain and 
suddenly we were in it and it was snow. The snow slanted 
across the wind, the bare ground was covered, the stumps of 
trees projected, there was snow on the guns and there were 
paths in the snow going back to the latrines behind trenches. 

Later, below in the town, I watched the snow falling, 
looking out of the window of the bawdy-house, the house 
for officers, where I sat with a friend and two glasses 
drinking a bottle of Asti, and, looking out at the snow 
falling slowly and heavily, we knew it was all over for that 
year. Up the river the mountains had not been taken; none 
of the mountains beyond the river had been taken. That 
was all left for next year. My friend saw the priest from 
our mess going by in the street, walking carefully in the 
slush, and pounded on the window^ to attract his attention. 
The priest looked up. He saw us and smiled. My friend 
motioned for him to come in. The priest shook his head 
and went on. That night in the mess after the spaghetti 
course, which every one ate very quickly and seriously, 
lifting the spaghetti on the fork until the loose strands hung 
clear then lowering it into the mouth, or else using a 
continuous lift and sucking into the mouth, helping our- 
selves to wine from the grass-covered gallon flask; it 

H 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


swung in a metal cradle and you pulled the neck of the 
flask down with the forefinger and the wine, clear red, 
tannic and lovely, poured out into the glass held with the 
same hand; after this course, the captain commenced 
picking on the priest. 

The priest was young and blushed easily and wore a 
uniform like the rest of us but with a cross in dark red 
velvet above the left breast-pocket of his grey tunic. The 
captain spoke pidgin Italian for my doubtful benefit, in 
order that I might understand perfectly, that nothing 
should be lost. 

Triest to-day with girls,’ the captain said looking at the 
priest and at me. The priest smiled and blushed and shook 
his head. This captain baited him often. 

‘Not true?’ asked the captain. ‘To-day I see priest with 
girls.’ 

‘No,’ said the priest. The other officers were amused at 
the baiting. 

‘Priest not with girls,’ went on the captain. ‘Priest 
never with girls,’ he explained to me. He took my glass 
and filled it, looking at my eyes all the time, but not losing 
sight of the priest. 

‘Priest every night five against one.’ Every one at the 
table laughed. ‘You understand? Priest every night five 
against one.’ He made a gesture and laughed loudly. The 
priest accepted it as a joke. 

‘The Pope wants the Austrians to win the war,’ the 
major said. ‘He loves Franz Joseph. That’s where the 
money comes from. I am an atheist.’ 

‘Did you ever read the Black PigV asked the lieutenant. 
‘I will get you a copy. It was that which shook my faith.’ 

‘It is a filthy and vile book,’ said the priest. ‘You do not 
really like it.’ 


15 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Tt is very valuable/ said the lieutenant. ^It tells you 
about those priests. You will like it/ he said to me. I 
smiled at the priest and he smiled back across the candle- 
light. ‘Don’t you read it/ he said. 

T will get it for 5^ou/ said the lieutenant. 

‘All thinking men are atheists/ the major said. ‘I do 
not believe in the Freemasons however.’ 

T believe in the Freemasons/ the lieutenant said. ‘It is 
a noble organization.’ Someone came in and as the door 
opened I could see the sxiow falling. 

‘There will be no more offensive now that the snow has 
come/ I said, 

‘Certainly not/ said the major. ‘You should go on leave. 
You should go to Rome, Naples, Sicily - ’ 

‘He should visit Am.alfi,’ said the lieutenant. ‘I will 
write you cards to my family in Amalfi. They will love 
you like a son.’ 

‘He should go to Palermo.’ 

‘He ought to go to Capri.’ 

‘I would like you to see Abruzzi and visit my family at 
Capracotta,’ said the priest. 

‘Listen to him talk about the Abruzzi. There’s more 
snow there than here. He doesn’t v/ant to see peasants. 
Let him go to centres of culture and civilization.’ 

‘He should have fine girls. I wdll give you the addresses 
of places in Naples. Beautiful young girls - accompanied 
by their mothers. Ha! Ha! Hal’ 

He looked at the priest and shouted, ‘Every night priest 
five against one!’ They all laughed again. 

‘You must go on leave at once,’ the major said. 

‘I would like to go with you and show you things,’ the 
lieutenant said. 

‘When you come back bring a phonograph.’ 

i6 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Bring good opera disks/ 

‘Bring Caruso/ 

‘Don’t bring Caruso. He bellows.’ 

‘Don’t you wish you could bellow like him?’ 

‘He bellows. I say he bellows!’ 

‘I would like you to go to Abruzzi,’ the priest said. The 
others were shouting. ‘There is good hunting. You would 
like the people and though it is cold it is clear and dry. 
You could stay with my family. My father is a famous 
hunter.’ 

‘Come on/ said the captain. ‘We go whore-house before 
it shuts.’ 

‘Good night/ I said to the priest. 

‘Good night,’ he said. 


CHAPTER 3 

When I came back to the front we still lived in that town. 
There were many more guns in the country around and 
the spring had come. The fields were green and there were 
small green shoots on the vines, the trees along the road 
had small leaves and a breeze came from the sea. I saw 
the town with the hill and the old castle above it in a cup 
in the hills with the mountains beyond, brown mountains 
with a little green on their slopes. In the town there were 
more guns, there were some new hospitals, you met British 
men and sometimes women, on the street, and a few more 
houses had been hit by shell-fire. It was warm and like 
the spring and I walked down the alleyway of trees, 
warmed from the sun on the wall, and found we still lived 
n 17 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

in the same house and that it all looked the same as when 
I had left it. The door was open, there was a soldier 
sitting on a bench outside in the sun, an ambulance was 
waiting by the side door and inside the door, as I went in, 
there was the smell of marble floors and hospital. It was 
all as I had left it except that now it was spring. I looked 
in the door of the big room and saw the major sitting at 
his desk, the window open and the sunlight coming into 
the room. He did not see me and I did not know whether 
to go in and report or go upstairs first and clean up. I 
decided to go on upstairs. 

The room I shared with the lieutenant Rinaldi looked 
out on the courtyard. The window was open, my bed 
was made up with blankets and my things hung on the 
wall, the gas-mask in an oblong tin can, the steel helmet 
on the same peg. At the foot of the bed was my fiat trunk, 
and my winter boots, the leather shiny with oil, were on 
the trunk. My Austrian sniper’s rifle with its blued 
octagon barrel and the lovely dark walnut, cheek-fitted, 
schutzen stock, hung over the two beds. The telescope 
that fitted it was, I remembered, locked in the trunk. 
The lieutenant, Rinaldi, lay asleep on the other bed. He 
woke when he heard me in the room and sat up. 

‘Ciaou!’ he said. ‘What kind of time did you have?’ 

‘Magnificent.’ 

We shook hands and he put his arm around my neck 
and kissed me. 

‘Oughf,’ I said. 

‘You’re dirty,’ he said. ‘You ought to wash. Where 
did you go and what did you do? Tell me eveiything at 
once.’ 

‘I went everyivhere. Milan, Florence, Rome, Naples, 
Villa San Giovanni, Messina, Taormina - ’ 

i8 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Won talk like a time-table. Did you have any beautiful 
adventures?^ 

Wesd 

nVhere?’ 

^ Alilano, Firenze, Roma, Napoli - ’ 

What^s enough. Tell me really what was the best.' 

Tn Milano.' 

'That was because it was first. Where did you meet her? 
In the Cova? Where did you go? How did you feel? Tell 
me everything at once. Did you stay all night?’ 

Wes.’ 

'That’s nothing. Here now we have beautiful girls. 
New girls never been to the front before.’ 

'Wonderful.’ 

'You don’t believe me? We will go now this afternoon 
and see. And in the town we have beautiful English girls. 
I am now in love with Miss Barkley. I will take you to call. 
I will probably marry Miss Barkley.’ 

'I have to get washed and report. Doesn’t anybody 
work now?’ 

'Since you are gone we have nothing but frostbites, 
chilblains, jaundice, gonorrhoea, self-inflicted wounds, 
pneumonia and hard and soft chancres. Every week some 
one gets wounded by rock fragments. There are a few 
real wounded. Next week the w^ar starts again. Perhaps it 
starts again. They say so. Do you think I would do right 
to marry Miss Barkley - after the war of course?’ 

'Absolutely,’ I said and poured the basin full of water. 

'To-night you will tell me everything,’ said Rinaldi. 
'Now I must go back to sleep to be fresh and beautiful for 
Miss Barkley.’ 

I took off my tunic and shirt and washed in the cold 
water in the basin. While I rubbed myself with a towel I 

19 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


looked around the room and out the window and at Rinaldi 
lying with his eyes closed on the bed. He was good“ 
looking, was my age, and he came from Amalfi. He loved 
being a surgeon and we were great friends. While I was 
looking at him he opened his eyes. 

'Have you any money?’ 

'Yes.’ 

'Loan me fifty lire.’ 

I dried my hands and took out my pocket-book from 
the inside of my tunic hanging on the wall. Rinaldi took 
the note, folded it without rising from the bed and slid it 
in his breeches pocket. He smiled, 'I must make on Miss 
Barkley the impression of a man of sufficient wealth. You 
are my great and good friend and financial protector.’ 

'Go to hell,’ I said. 

That night at the mess I sat next to the priest and he 
was disappointed and suddenly hurt that I had not gone 
to the Abnazzi. He had written to his father that I was 
coming and they had made preparations. I myself felt 
as badly as he did and could not understand why I had 
not gone. It was what I had wanted to do and I tried to 
explain hov/ one thing had led to another and finally he 
saw it and understood that I had really wanted to go and 
it was almost all right. I had drunk much wine and 
afterwards coffee and Strega and I explained, winefully, 
how we did not do the things we wanted to do; we never 
did such things. 

We two were talking while the others argued. I had 
wanted to go to Abruzzi. I had gone to no place where 
the roads were frozen and hard as iron, where it was clear 
cold and dry and the snoAV was dry and powdery and 
hare-tracks in the snow and the peasants took off their 
hats and called you Lord and there was good hunting. 

20 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I had gone to no such place but to the smoke of cafes and 
nights when the room whirled and you needed to look at 
the wall to make it stop, nights in bed, drunk, when you 
knew that that was all there was, and the strange excite- 
ment of waking and not knowing who it w^as with you^ 
and the world all unreal in the dark and so exciting that 
you must resume again unknowing and not caring in the 
night, sure that this was all and all and all and not caring. 
Suddenly to care very much and to sleep, to w^ake with it 
sometimes morning and all that had been there gone and 
everything sharp and hard and clear and sometimes a 
dispute about the cost. Sometimes still pleasant and fond 
and warm and breakfast and lunch. Sometimes all nice- 
ness gone and glad to get out on the street but always 
another day starting and then another night. I tried to 
tell about the night and the difference between the night 
and the day and how^ the night was better unless the day 
was very clean and cold and I could not tell it; as I cannot 
tell it now. But if you have had it you know. He had not 
had it but he understood that I had really wanted to go 
to the Abruzzi but had not gone and we were still friends, 
with many tastes alike, but with the difference between 
us. He had always known what I did not know and what, 
when I learned it, I w^as always able to forget. But I did 
not know that then, although I learned it later. In the 
meantime we were all at the mess, the meal was finished, 
and the argument went on. We two stopped talking and 
the captain shouted, Triest not happy. Priest not happy 
without girls.’ 

T am happy,’ said the priest. 

‘Priest not happy. Priest wants Austrians to win the 
war,’ the captain said. The others listened. The priest 
shook his head. 


21 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘No,’ he said. 

‘Priest wants us never to attack. Don’t you want us 
never to attack?’ 

‘No. If there is a war I suppose we must attack.’ 

‘Must attack. Shall attack!’ 

The priest nodded. 

‘Leave him alone,’ the major said. ‘He’s all right.” 
‘He can’t do anything about it anyway,’ the captain 
said. We all got up and left the table. 


CHAPTER 4 

The battery in the next garden woke me in the morning 
and I saw the sun coming through the window and got 
out of the bed. I went to the window and looked out. 
The gravel paths were moist and the grass was wet with 
dew. The battery fired twice and the air came each 
time like a blow and shook the window and made the 
front of my pyjamas flap. I could not see the guns but 
they were evidently firing directly over us. It was a 
nuisance to have them there but it was a comfort that 
they were no bigger. As I looked out at the garden I 
heard a motor- truck starting on the road. I dressed, 
went downstairs, had some coffee in the kitchen and 
went out to the garage. 

Ten cars were lined up side by side under the long 
shed. They were top-heavy, blunt-nosed ambulances, 
painted grey and built like moving-vans. The mechanics 
were working on one out in the yard. Three others were 
up in the mountains at dressing-stations. 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Do they ever shell that battery?' I asked one of the 
mechanics. 

'No, Signor Tenente. It is protected by the little 
hill.’ 

'How’s everything?’ 

'Not so bad. This machine is no good but the others 
march.’ He stopped working and smiled. 'Were you 
on permission?’ 

'Yes.’ 

He wiped his hands on his jumper and grinned. 'You 
have a good time?’ The others all grinned too. 

'Fine,’ I said. 'What’s the matter with this machine?’ 

'It’s no good. One thing after another.’ 

'What’s the matter now?’ 

'New rings.’ 

I left them working, the car looking disgraced and 
empty with the engine open and parts spread on the 
work-bench, and went in under the shed and looked at 
each of the cars. They were moderately clean, a few 
freshly washed, the others dusty. I looked at the tyres 
carefully, looking for cuts or stone bruises. Every- 
thing seemed in good condition. It evidently made no 
difference whether I was there to look after things or 
not. I had imagined that the condition of the cars, 
whether or not things were obtainable, the smooth func- 
tioning of the business of removing wounded and sick 
from the dressing-stations, hauling them back from the 
mountains to the clearing-station and then distributing 
them to the hospitals named on their papers, depended 
to a considerable extent on myself. Evidently it did not 
matter whether I was there or not. 

'Has there been any trouble getting parts?’ I asked 
the sergeant mechanic. 


^3 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘No, Signor Tenente.’ 

‘Where is the gasolene park now?’ 

‘At the same place.’ 

‘Good,’ I said and went back to the house and drank 
another bowl of coffee at the mess table. The coffee was 
a pale grey and sweet with condensed milk. Outside 
the window it was a lovely spring morning. There was 
that beginning of a feeling of dryness in the nose that 
meant the day would be hot later on. That day I visited 
the posts in the mountains and was back in town late in 
the afternoon. 

The whole thing seemed to run better while I was 
away. The offensive was going to start again I heard. 
The division for which we worked were to attack at a 
place up the river and the major told me that I would see 
about the posts for during the attack. The attack would 
cross the river up above the narrow gorge and spread up 
the hillside. The posts for the cars would have to be 
as near the river as they could get and keep covered. 
They would, of course, be selected by the infantry but 
we were supposed to work it out. It was one of those 
things that gave you a false feeling of soldiering. 

I was very dusty and dirty and went up to my room 
to wash, Rinaldi w^as sitting on the bed with a copy of 
Hugo’s English grammar. He was dressed, wore his 
black boots, and his hair shone, 

‘Splendid,’ he said when he saw me. ‘You will come 
with me to see Miss Barkley,’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Yes. You will please come and make me a good 
impression on her.’ 

‘All right. Wait till I get cleaned up.’ 

‘Wash up and come as you are.’ 

24 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


I washed, brushed my hair and we started. 

‘Wait a minute/ Rinaldi said. Terhaps we should 
have a drink.’ He opened his trunk and took out a 
bottle. 

'Not Strega/ I said. 

'No. Grappa.’ 

'All right.’ 

He poured tw^o glasses and we touched them, first 
fingers extended. The grappa was very strong. 

'Another.^’ 

'All right/ I said. We drank the second grappa, 
Rinaldi put away the bottle and we went down the 
stairs. It was hot walking through the town but the sun 
was starting to go down and it was very pleasant. The 
British hospital was a big villa built by Germans before 
the war. Miss Barkley was in the garden. Another 
nurse was with her. We saw their white uniforms through 
the trees and walked toward them. Rinaldi saluted. I 
saluted too but more moderately. 

'How do you do?’ Miss Barkley said. 'You’re not an 
Italian, are you?’ 

‘Oh, no.’ 

Rinaldi was talking with the other nurse. They were 
laughing. 

‘What an odd thing ~ to be in the Italian army.’ 

'It’s not really the army. It’s only the ambulance.’ 

'It’s very odd though. Why did you do it?’ 

'I don’t loiow,’ I said. 'There isn’t always an explana- 
tion for ever}i:hing.’ 

'Oh, isn’t there? I was brought up to think there 
was.’ 

'That’s awfully nice.’ 

'Do we have to go on and talk this way?’ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


^No/ I said. 

‘That’s a relief. Isn’t it?’ 

‘What is the stick?’ I asked. Miss Barkley was quite 
tall. She wore what seemed to me to be a nurse’s uniform, 
was blonde and had a tawny skin and grey eyes. I thought 
she was very beautiful. She was carrying a thin rattan 
stick like a toy riding-crop, bound in leather. 

Tt belonged to a boy who was killed last year.’ 

T’m awfully sorry.’ 

‘He was a very nice boy. He was going to marry me 
and he was killed on the Somme.’ 

Tt was a ghastly show.’ 

‘Were you there?’ 

‘No.’ 

T’ve heard about it,’ she said. ‘There’s not really 
any war of that sort down here. They sent me the little 
stick. His mother sent it to me. They returned it with 
his things.’ 

‘Had you been engaged long?’ 

‘Eight years. We grew up together.’ 

‘And why didn’t you marry?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘I was a fool not to. 1 could 
have given him that anyway. But I thought it would 
be bad for him.’ 

‘I see.’ 

‘Have you ever loved anyone?’ 

‘No,’ I said. 

We sat down on a bench and I looked at her. 

‘You have beautiful hair,’ I said. 

‘Do you like it?’ 

‘Very much.’ 

‘I was going to cut it all off when he died.’ 

‘No.’ 


26 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T wanted to do something for him. You see I didn’t 
care about the other thing and he could have had it all. 
He could have had anything he wanted if I had known. 
I would have married him or anything. I know all about 
it now. But then he wanted to go to war and I didn’t 
know.’ 

I did not say an5thing. 

T didn’t know about anything then. I thought it 
would be worse for him. I thought perhaps he couldn’t 
stand it and then of course he was killed and that was 
the end of it.’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Oh, yes,’ she said. ‘That’s the end of it.’ 

We looked at Rinaldi talking with the other nurse. 

‘What was her name?’ 

‘Ferguson. Helen Ferguson. Your friend is a doctor, 
isn’t he?’ 

‘Yes. He’s very good.’ 

‘That’s splendid. You rarely find any one any good 
this close to the front. This is close to the front, isn’t 
it?’ 

‘Quite.’ 

‘It’s a silly front,’ she said. ‘But it’s very beautiful. 
Are they going to have an offensive?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Then we’ll have to work. There’s no work now.’ 

‘Have you done nursing long?’ 

‘Since the end of ’fifteen. I started when he did. I 
remember having a silly idea he might come to the 
hospital where I was. With a sabre cut, I suppose, and a 
bandage around his head. Or shot through the shoulder. 
Something picturesque.’ 

‘This is the picturesque front,’ I said. 

27 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Yes,’ she said. ‘People can’t realize what France is 
like. If they did it couldn’t all go on. He didn’t have 
a sabre cut. They blew him all to bits.’ 

I didn’t say an3rthing. 

‘Do you suppose it will always go on?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘What’s to stop it?’ 

‘It will crack somewhere.’ 

‘We’ll crack. We’ll crack in France. They can’t go 
on doing things like the Somme and not crack.’ 

‘They won’t crack here,’ I said. 

‘You think not?’ 

‘No. They did very well last summer.’ 

‘They may crack,’ she said. ‘Anybody may crack.’ 
‘The Germans too.’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I think not.’ 

We went over toward Rinaldi and Miss Ferguson. 

‘You love Italy?’ Rinaldi asked Miss Ferguson in 
English. 

‘Quite well.’ 

‘No understand,’ Rinaldi shook his head. 

Bastante bene,’ I translated. He shook his head. 

‘That is not good. You love England?’ 

‘Not too well. I’m Scottish,- you see.’ 

Rinaldi looked at me blankly. 

She s Scottish, so she loves Scotland better than Eng- 
land,’ I said in Italian. 

‘But Scotland is England.’ 

I translated this for Miss Ferguson. 

‘Pas encore,’ said Miss Ferguson. 

‘Not really?’ 

‘Never. We do not like the English.’ 

‘Not like the English? Not like Miss Barkley?’ 

28 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


*Oh, that’s different. She’s partly Scottish too. You 
mustn’t take everything so literally.’ 

After a while we said good night and left. Walking 
home Rinaldi said, ‘Miss Barkley prefers you to me. 
That is very clear. But the little Scottish one is very 
nice.’ 

‘Very/ I said. I had not noticed her. ‘You like her?’ 

‘No/ said Rinaldi. 


CHAPTER 5 

The next afternoon I went to call on Miss Barkley 
again. She was not in the garden and I went to the 
side door of the villa where the ambulances drove up. 
Inside I saw the head nurse, who said Miss Barkley was 
on duty - ‘there’s a war on, you know.’ 

I said I knew. 

‘You’re the American in the Italian army?’ she asked. 
‘Yes, ma’am.’ 

‘How did you happen to do that? Why didn’t you 
join up with us?’ 

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Could I join now?’ 

‘I’m afraid not now. Tell me. Why did you join up 
with the Italians?’ 

‘I was in Italy,’ I said, ‘and I spoke Italian.’ 

‘Oh,’ she said. ‘I’m learning it. It’s a beautiful lan- 
guage.’ 

‘Somebody said you should be able to learn it in two 
weeks.’ 

‘Oh, I’ll not learn it in two weeks. I’ve studied it for 

29 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

months now. You may come and see her after seven 
o’clock if you wish. She’ll be off then. But don’t bring 
a lot of Italians.’ 

‘Not even for the beautiful language?’ 

‘No. Nor for the beautiful uniforms.’ 

‘Good evening,’ I said. 

‘A rivederci, Tenente.’ 

‘A rivederla.’ I saluted and went out. It was im- 
possible to salute foreigners as an Italian, without em- 
barrassment. The Italian salute never seemed made for 
export. 

The day had been hot. I had been up the river to the 
bridgehead at Plava. It was there that the offensive was 
to begin. It had been impossible to advance on the far 
side the year before because there was only one road 
leading down from the pass to the pontoon bridge and it 
was under machine-gun and shell fire for nearly a mile. 
It was not wide enough either to carry all the transport 
for an offensive and the Austrians could make a shambles 
out of it. But the Italians had crossed and spread out 
a little way on the far side to hold about a mile and a 
half on the Austrian side of the river. It was a nasty 
place and the Austrians should not have let them hold 
it. I suppose it was mutual tolerance because the Austrians 
still kept a bridgehead further down the river. The 
Austrian trenches were above on the hill-side only a 
few yards from the Italian lines. There had been a 
little town but it was all rubble. There was what was 
left of a railway station and a smashed permanent bridge 
that could not be repaired and used because it was in 
plain sight. 

I went along the narrow road down towards the river, 
left the car at the dressing-station under the hill, crossed 

30 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


the pontoon bridge, which was protected by a shoulder 
of the mountain, and went through the trenches in the 
smashed-down town and along the edge of the slope. 
Everybody was in the dugouts. There were racks of 
rockets standing to be touched off to call for help from 
the artillery or to signal with if the telephone wires 
were cut. It was quiet, hot and dirty. I looked across the 
wire at the Austrian lines. Nobody was in sight. I had 
a drink with a captain that I knew in one of the dugouts 
and went back across the bridge. 

A new wide road was being finished that would go over 
the mountain and zig-zag down to the bridge. When 
this road was finished the offensive would start. It came 
down through the forest in sharp turns. The system 
was to bring everything down the new road and take the 
empty trucks, carts and loaded ambulances and all 
returning traffic up the old narrow road. The dressing- 
station was on the Austrian side of the river under the 
edge of the hill and stretcher-bearers would bring the 
wounded back across the pontoon bridge. It would 
be the same when the offensive started. As far as I 
could make out the last mile or so of the new road where 
it started to level out would be able to be shelled steadily 
by the Austrians. It looked as though it might be a 
mess. But I found a place where the cars would be 
sheltered after they had passed that last bad-looking 
bit and could wait for the wounded to be brought across 
the pontoon bridge. I would have liked to drive over the 
new road but it was not yet finished. It looked wide 
and well made with a good grade and the turns looked 
very impressive where you could see them through 
openings in the forest on the mountain side. The cars 
would be all right with their good metal-to-metal brakes 

31 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


and an3rvvay, coming down, they v/ould not be loaded, 
I drove back up the narrow road. 

Two carabinieri held the car up. A shell had fallen 
and while we waited three others fell up the road. They 
were seventy-sevens and came with a whishing rush of 
air, a hard bright burst and flash and then grey smoke 
that blew across the road. The carabinieri waved us to 
go on. Passing where the shells had landed I avoided 
the small broken places and smelled the high explosive 
and the smell of blasted clay and stone and freshly- 
shattered flint. I drove back to Gorizia and our villa and, 
as I said, went to call on Miss Barkley, who was on 
duty. 

At dinner I ate very quickly and left for the villa 
where the British had their hospital. It was really very 
large and beautiful and there were fine trees in the 
grounds. Miss Barkley was sitting on a bench in the 
garden. Miss Ferguson was with her. They seemed 
glad to see me and in a little while Miss Ferguson excused 
herself and went away. 

T’ll leave you two,’ she said. ‘You get along very 
well without me.’ 

‘Don’t go, Helen,’ Miss Barkley said. 

‘I’d really rather. I must write some letters.’ 

‘Good night,’ I said. 

‘Good night, Mr. Henry.’ 

‘Don’t write anything that will bother the censor.’ 

‘Don’t worry. I only write about wLat a beautiful 
place we live in and how brave the Italians are.’ 

‘That way you’ll be decorated.’ 

‘That will be nice. Good night, Catherine.’ 

‘I’ll see you in a little while,’ Miss Barkley said. Miss 
Ferguson walked away in the dark, 

3 ^ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'She’s nice/ I said. 

'Oh, yes, she’s very nice. She’s a nurse.’ 

' Aren’t you a nurse?’ 

'Oh, no. I’m something called a V.A.D. We work 
very hard but no one trusts us.’ 

'Why not?’ 

'They don’t trust us when there’s nothing going on. 
When there is really work they trust us.’ 

'What is the difference?’ 

'A nurse is like a doctor. It takes a long time to be, 
A V.A.D. is a short cut.’ 

T see.’ 

'The Italians didn’t want women so near the front. 
So we’re all on very special behaviour. We don’t go out.’ 

'I can come here though.’ 

'Oh, yes. We’re not cloistered.’ 

'Let’s drop the war.’ 

'It’s very hard. There’s no place to drop it,’ 

'Let’s drop it anyway.’ 

‘All right.’ 

We looked at each other in the dark. I thought she 
was very beautiful and I took her hand. She let me 
take it and I held it and put my arm around under her 
arm. 

‘No,’ she said. I kept my arm where it was. 

‘Why not?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Please.’ I leaned forward in the dark 
to kiss her and there was a sharp stinging flash. She 
had slapped my face hard. Her hand had hit my nose 
and eyes, and tears came in my eyes from the reflex. 

'I’m so sorry,’ she said. I felt I had a certain ad- 
vantage, 
c 


33 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'You were quite right.’ 

T’m dreadfully sorry,’ she said, T just couldn’t stand 
the nurse’s-evening-off aspect of it. I didn’t mean to 
hurt you. I did hurt you, didn’t I?’ 

She was looking at me in the dark. I was angry and 
yet certain, seeing it all ahead like the moves in a chess 
game. 

‘You did exactly right,’ I said. T don’t mind at all.” 

‘Poor man.’ 

‘You see I’ve been leading a sort of a funny life. And 
I never even talk English. And then you are so very 
beautiful.’ I looked at her. 

‘You don’t need to say a lot of nonsense. I said I was 
sorry. We do get along.’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘And we have gotten away from the 
war.’ 

She laughed. It was the first time I had ever heard 
her laugh. I watched her face. 

‘You are sweet,’ she said, 

‘No, I’m not.’ 

‘Yes. You are a dear, I’d be glad to kiss you if you 
don’t mind.’ 

I looked in her eyes and put my arm around her as I 
had before and kissed her. I kissed her hard and held 
her tight and tried to open her lips ; they were closed 
tight. I was still angry and as I held her suddenly she 
shivered. I held her close against me and could feel 
her heart beating and her lips opened and her head went 
back against my hand and then she was crying on my 
shoulder. 

‘Oh, darling,’ she said, ‘You will be good to me, 
won’t you?’ 

What the hell, I thought. I stroked her hair and patted 
her shoulder. She was crying. 

34 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'You will, won’t you?’ She looked up at me. 'Because 
we’re going to have a strange life.’ 

After a while I walked with her to the door of the 
villa and she went in and I walked home. Back at the 
villa I went upstairs to the room. Rinaldi was lying on 
his bed. He looked at me. 

'So you make progress with Miss Barkley?’ 

'We are friends.’ 

‘You have that pleasant air of a dog in heat.’ 

I did not understand the word, 

'Of a what?’ 

He explained. 

‘You/ I said, 'have that pleasant air of a dog who - ’ 

‘Stop it,’ he said. 'In a little while we would say 
insulting things.’ He laughed. ^ 

'Good night/ I said. 

‘Good night, little puppy.’ 

I knocked over his candle with the pillow and got into 
bed in the dark. 

Rinaldi picked up the candle, lit it and went on 
reading. 


CHAPTER 6 


I WAS away for two days at the posts. When I got home 
it was too late and I did not see Miss Barkley until the 
next evening. She was not in the garden and I had to 
wait in the office of the hospital until she came down. 
There were many marble busts on painted wooden 
pillars along the walls of the room they used for an 
office. The hall too, that the office opened on, was lined 

35 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


with them. They had the complete marble quality of all 
looking alike. Sculpture had always seemed a dull 
business - still bronzes looked like something. But 
marble busts all looked like a cemetery. There was 
one fine cemetery though - the one at Pisa. Genoa was 
the place to see the bad marbles. This had been the 
villa of a very wealthy German and the busts must have 
cost him plenty. I wondered who had done them and 
how much he got. I tried to make out whether they 
were members of the family or what; but they were all 
uniformly classical. You could not tell anything about 
them. 

I sat on a chair and held my cap. We were supposed 
to wear steel helmets even in Gorizia but they were un- 
comfortable and too theatrical in a town where the 
civilian inhabitants had not been evacuated. I wore 
one when we went up to the posts, and carried an English 
gas-mask. We were just beginning to get some of them. 
They were a real mask. Also we were required to wear 
an automatic pistol; even doctors and sanitary officers. 
I felt it against the back of the chair. You were liable 
to arrest if you did not have one worn in plain sight. 
Rinaldi carried a holster stuffed with toilet paper. I 
wore a real one and felt like a gunman until I practised 
firing it. It was an Astra 7.65 calibre with a short barrel 
and it jumped so sharply when you let it off that there 
was no question of hitting anything. I practised with it, 
holding below the target and trying to master the jerk 
of the ridiculous short barrel until I could hit within a 
yard of where I aimed at twenty paces and then the 
ridiculousness of carrying a pistol at all came over me 
and I soon forgot it and carried it flopping against the 
small of my back with no feeling at all except a vague 

36 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


sort of shame when I met English-speaking people. 
I sat now in the chair and an orderly of some sort looked 
at me disapprovingly from behind a desk while I looked 
at the marble floor, the pillars with the marble busts, 
and the frescoes on the wall and waited for Miss Barkley. 
The frescoes were not bad. Any frescoes were good 
when they started to peel and flake off. 

I saw Catherine Barkley coming down the hall, and 
stood up. She did not seem tall walking toward me but 
she looked very lovely. 

^Good evening, Mr. Henry,’ she said. 

‘How do you do?’ I said. The orderly was listening 
behind the desk. 

‘Shall we sit here or go out in the garden?’ 

‘Let’s go out. It’s much cooler.’ 

I walked behind her out into the garden, the orderly 
looking after us. When we w^ere out on the gravel drive 
she said, ‘Where have you been?’ 

‘I’ve been out on post.’ 

‘You couldn’t have sent me a note?’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘Not very well. I thought I was coming 
back.’ 

‘You ought to have let me know, darling.’ 

We were off the driveway, walking under the trees. 
I took her hands, then stopped and kissed her. 

‘Isn’t there anywhere we can go?’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘We have to just walk here. You’ve 
been away a long time.’ 

‘This is the third day. But I’m back now.’ 

She looked at me. ‘And you do love me?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘You did say you loved me, didn’t you?’ 

‘Yes,’ I lied. ‘I love you.’ I had not said it before. 

37 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘And you call me Catherine?’ 

‘Catherine.’ We walked on a way and were stopped 
under a tree. 

‘Say, “I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.” ’ 

‘I’ve come back to Catherine in the night.’ 

‘Oh, darling, you have come back, haven’t you?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘I love you so and it’s been awful. You won’t go 
away?’ 

‘No. I’ll always come back.’ 

‘Oh, I love you so. Please put your hand there again.’ 

‘It’s not been away.’ I turned her so I could see 
her face when I kissed her and I saw that her eyes 
were shut. I kissed both her shut eyes. I thought she 
was probably a little crazy. It was all right if she was. I 
did not care what I was getting into. This was better than 
going every evening to the house for officers where the 
girls climbed all over you and put your cap on back- 
ward as a sign of affection between their trips upstairs 
with brother officers. I knew I did not love Catherine 
Barkley nor had any idea of loving her. This was a 
game, like bridge, in which you said things instead of 
playing cards. Like bridge you had to pretend you 
were playing for money or playing for some stakes. 
Nobody had mentioned what the stakes were. It was all 
right with me. 

‘I wish there was some place we could go,’ I said. 
I was experiencing the masculine difficulty of making 
love very long standing up. 

‘There isn’t any place,’ she said. She came back 
from wherever she had been. 

‘We might sit there just for a little while.’ 

We sat on the flat stone bench and I held Catherine 

38 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Barkley’s hand. She would not let me put my arm 
around her. 

‘Are you very tired?’ she asked. 

‘No.’ 

She looked down at the grass. 

‘This is a rotten game we play, isn’t it?’ 

‘What game?’ 

‘Don’t be dull.’ 

‘I’m not, on purpose.’ 

‘You’re a nice boy,’ she said. ‘And you play it as well 
as you know how. But it’s a rotten game.’ 

‘Do you always know what people think?’ 

‘Not always. But I do with you. You don’t have to 
pretend you love me. That’s over for the evening. Is 
there anything you’d like to talk about?’ 

‘But I do love you.’ 

‘Please let’s not lie when we don’t have to. I had 
a very fine little show and I’m all right now. You see 
I’m not mad and I’m not gone off. It’s only a little 
sometimes.’ 

I pressed her hand, ‘Dear Catherine.’ 

‘It sounds very funny now — Catherine. You don’t 
pronounce it very much alike. But you’re very nice. 
You’re a very good boy.’ 

‘That’s what the priest said.’ 

‘Yes, you’re very good. And you will come and see 
me?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

‘And you don’t have to say you love me. That’s all 
over for a while.’ She stood up and put out her hand. 
‘Good night.’ 

I wanted to kiss her. 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I’m awfully tired.’ 

39 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Kiss me, though,’ I said. 

‘I’m awfully tired, darling.’ 

‘Kiss me.’ 

‘Do you want to very much?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

We kissed and she broke away suddenly. ‘No. Good 
night, please, darling.’ We walked to the door and I saw 
her go in and down the hall. I liked to watch her move. 
She went on down the hall. I went on home. It was 
a hot night and there was a good deal going on up in the 
mountains. I watched the flashes on San Gabriele. 

I stopped in front of the Villa Rossa. The shutters 
were \ip but it was still going on inside. Somebody was 
singing. I went on home. Rinaldi came in while I was 
undressing. 

‘Ah, ha!’ he said. ‘It does not go so well. Baby is 
puzzled.’ 

‘Where have you been?’ 

‘At the Villa Rossa. It was very edifying, baby. We 
all sang. Where have you been?’ 

‘Calhng on the British.’ 

‘Thank God I did not become involved with the 
British.’ 


CHAPTER 7 

I CAME back the next afternoon from our first moun- 
tain post and stopped the car at the smistimento where 
the wounded and sick were sorted by their papers and 
the papers marked for the different hospitals. I had 
been driving and I sat in the car and the driver took the 

40 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


papers in. It was a hot day and the sky was very bright 
and blue and the road was white and dusty. I sat in the 
high seat of the Fiat and thought about nothing. A 
regiment went by in the road and I watched them pass. 
The men were hot and sweating. Some wore their steel 
helmets but most of them carried them slung from their 
packs. Most of the helmets were too big and came 
down almost over the ears of the men who wore them. 
The officers all wore helmets; better-fitting helmets. It 
was half of the Brigata Basilicata. I identified them by 
their red and white striped collar mark. There were 
stragglers going b)^ long after the regiment had passed 
- men who could not keep up with their platoons. They 
were sweaty, dusty and tired. Some looked pretty bad. 
A soldier came along after the last of the stragglers. 
He was walking with a limp. He stopped and sat down 
beside the road. I got down and went over. 

‘What’s the matter ? ” 

He looked at me, then stood up. 

T’m going on.’ 

‘What’s the trouble?’ 

‘ — the war.’ 

‘What’s wrong with your leg?’ 

‘It’s not my leg. I got a rupture.’ 

‘Why don’t you ride with the transport?’ I asked. 
‘Why don’t you go to the hospital?’ 

‘They won’t let me. The lieutenant said I slipped the 
truss on purpose,’ 

‘Let me feel it.’ 

‘It’s way out.’ 

‘Which side is it on?’ 

‘Here,’ 

I felt it. 

41 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Cough,’ I said. 

‘I’m afraid it will make it bigger. It’s twice as big as 
it was this morning.’ 

‘Sit down,’ I said. ‘As soon as I get the papers on 
these wounded I’ll take you along the road and drop you 
with, your medical officers.’ 

‘He’ll say I did it on purpose.’ 

‘They can’t do an5^hing,’ I said. ‘It’s not a wound. 
You’ve had it before, haven’t you?’ 

‘But I lost the truss.’ 

‘They’ll send you to a hospital.’ 

‘Can’t I stay here, Tenente? 

‘No. I haven’t any papers for you.’ 

The driver came out of the door with the papers for 
the wounded in the car. 

‘Four for 105. Two for 132,’ he said. They were 
hospitals beyond the river. 

‘You drive,’ I said. I helped the soldier with the 
rupture up on the seat with us. 

‘You speak English?’ he asked. 

‘Sure.’ 

‘How you like this goddam war?’ 

‘Rotten.’ 

‘I say it’s rotten. Jesus Christ, I say it’s rotten.’ 

‘Were you in the States?’ 

‘Sure. In Pittsburg. I knew you was an American.’ 
‘Don’t I talk Italian good enough?’ 

‘I knew you was an American all right.’ 

‘Another American,’ said the driver in Italian looking 
at the hernia man. 

‘Listen, lootenant. Do you have to take me to that 
regiment?’ 

‘Yes.’ 


42 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Because the captain doctor knew I had this rupture. 
I threw away the goddam truss so it would get bad and 
I wouldn’t have to go to the line again.’ 

T see.’ 

‘Couldn’t you take me no place else?’ 

Tf it was closer to the front I could take you to a 
first medical post. But back here you’ve got to have 
papers.’ 

‘If I go back they’ll make me get operated on and 
then they’ll put me in the line all the time.’ 

I thought it over. 

‘You wouldn’t want to go in the line all the time, 
would you?’ he asked. 

‘No.’ 

‘Jesus Christ, ain’t this a goddam war?’ 

‘Listen,’ I said. ‘You get out and fall down by the 
road and get a bump on your head and I’ll pick you up 
on our way back and take you to a hospital. We’ll stop 
by the road here, Aldo.’ We stopped at the side of the 
road. I helped him down. 

‘I’ll be right here, lieutenant,’ he said. 

‘So long,’ I said. We went on and passed the regiment 
about a mile ahead, then crossed the river, cloudy with 
snow water and running fast through the spiles of the 
bridge, to ride along the road across the plain and deliver 
the wounded at the two hospitals. I drove coming back 
and went fast with the empty car to find the man from 
Pittsburg. First we passed the regiment, hotter and 
slower than ever: then the stragglers. Then we raw a 
horse ambulance stopped by the road. Two men were 
lifting the hernia man to put him in. They had come 
back for him. He shook his head at me. His helmet was 
off and his forehead was bleeding below the hair line. 

43 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


His nose was skinned and there was dust on the bloody 
patch and dust in his hair. 

‘Look at the bump, lieutenant!’ he shouted. ‘Nothing 
to do. They come back for me.’ 

When I got back to the villa it was five o’clock and I 
went out where we washed the cars, to take a shower. 
Then I made out my report in my room, sitting in my 
trousers and an undershirt in front of the open window. 
In two days the offensive was to start and I would go 
with the cars to Plava. It was a long time since I had 
written to the States and I loiew I should write but I 
had let it go so long that it was almost impossible to 
write now. There was nothing to write about. I sent 
a couple of army Zona di Guerra post-cards, crossing 
out everything except I am well. That should handle 
them. Those post-cards would be very fine in America; 
strange and mysterious. This was a strange and mysterious 
war zone but I supposed it was quite well run and grim 
compared to other wars with the Austrians. The 
Austrian army was created to give Napoleon victories; 
any Napoleon. I wished we had a Napoleon, but instead 
we had II Generale Cadoma, fat and prosperous, and 
Vittorio Emmanuele, the tiny man with the long thin 
neck and the goat beard. Over on the right they had 
the Duke of Aosta. Maybe he was too good-looking 
to be a great general but he looked like a man. Lots 
of them would have liked him to be king. He looked 
like a king. He was the King’s uncle and commanded 
the third army. We were in the second army. There were 
some British batteries up with the third army. I had 
met two gunners from that lot, in Milan. They were 
very nice and we had a big evening. They were big 

44 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

and shy and embarrassed and very appreciative together 
of anything that happened. I wished that I was with the 
British. It would have been much simpler. Still I would 
probably have been killed. Not in this ambulance busi- 
ness. Yes, even in the ambulance business. British 
ambulance drivers were killed sometimes. Well, I knew 
I would not be killed. Not in this war. It did not have 
anything to do with me. It seemed no more dangerous 
to me myself than war in the movies. I wished to God it 
was over though. Maybe it would finish this summer. 
Maybe the Austrians would crack. They had always 
cracked in other wars. What was the matter with this 
war? Everybody said the French were through. Rinaldi 
said that the French had mutinied and troops marched 
on Paris. I asked him what happened and he said, ‘Oh, 
they stopped them.' I wanted to go to Austria without 
war. I wanted to go to the Black Forest. I wanted to 
go to the Hartz Mountains. Where were the Hartz 
Mountains anyway? They were fighting in the Car- 
pathians. I did not want to go there an3way. It might 
be good though. I could go to Spain if there was no 
war. The sun was going down and the day was cooling 
off. After supper I would go and see Catherine Barkley. 
I wished she were here now. I wished I were in Milan 
with her. I would like to eat at the Cova and then walk 
down the Via Manzoni in the hot evening and cross over 
and turn off along the canal and go to the hotel with 
Catherine Barkley. Maybe she would. Maybe she 
would pretend that I was her boy that was killed and 
we would go in the front door and the porter would 
take off his cap and I would stop at the concierge's desk 
and ask for the key and she would stand by the elevator 
and then we would get in the elevator and it would go 

45 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


up very slowly clicking at all the floors and then our 
floor and the boy would open the door and stand there 
and she would step out and I would step out and we would 
walk down the hall and I would put the key in the door 
and open it and go in and then take down the telephone 
and ask them to send a bottle of capri bianca in a silver 
bucket full of ice and you would hear the ice against 
the pail coming down the corridor and the boy would 
knock and I would say leave it outside the door please. 
Because we would not wear any clothes because it was 
so hot and the window open and the swallows flying 
over the roofs of the houses and when it was dark after- 
ward and you went to the window very small bats hunting 
over the houses and close down over the trees and we 
would drink the capri and the door locked and it hot and 
only a sheet and the whole night and we would both 
love each other all night in the hot night in Milan. That 
was how it ought to be. I would eat quickly and go and 
see Catherine Barkley. 

They talked too much at the mess and I drank wine 
because to-night we were not all brothers unless I drank 
a little and talked with the priest about Archbishop 
Ireland who was, it seemed, a noble man and with whose 
injustice, the injustices he had received and in which I 
participated as an American, and of which I had never 
heard, I feigned acquaintance. It would have been im- 
polite not to have known something of them when I had 
listened to such a splendid explanation of their causes 
which were, after all, it seemed, misunderstandings. I 
thought he had a fine name and he came from Minne- 
sota which made a lovely name: Ireland of Minnesota, 
Ireland of Wisconsin, Ireland of Michigan. What made 
it pretty was that it sounded like Island. No that wasn’t 

46 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

it. There was more to it than that. Yes, father. That 
is true, father. Perhaps, father. No, father. Well, 
maybe yes, father. You know more about it than I do, 
father. The priest was good but dull. The officers 
were not good but dull. The King was good but dull. 
The wine was bad but not dull. It took the enamel off 
your teeth and left it on the roof of your mouth. 

‘And the priest was locked up,’ Rocca said, ‘because 
they found the three per cent, bonds on his person. 
It was in France of course. Here they would never 
have arrested him. He denied all knowledge of the five 
per cent, bonds. This took place at Beziers. I was there 
and reading of it in the paper, went to the jail and asked 
to see the priest. It was quite evident he had stolen the 
bonds.’ 

‘I don’t believe a word of this,’ Rinaldi said. 

‘Just as you like,’ Rocca said. ‘But I am telling it for 
our priest here. It is very informative. He is a priest; he 
will appreciate it.’ 

The priest smiled. ‘Go on,’ he said. T am listening.’ 

‘Of course some of the bonds were not accounted 
for but the priest had all of the three per cent, bonds 
and several local obligations, I forget exactly what they 
were. So I went to the jail, now this is the point of the 
story, and I stood outside his cell and I said as though 
I were going to confession, “Bless me, father, for you 
have sinned.” ’ 

There was great laughter from everybody. 

‘And what did he say?’ asked the priest. Rocca 
ignored this and went on to explain the joke to me. 
‘You see the point, don’t you?’ It seemed it was a very 
funny joke if you understood it properly. They poured 
me more wine and I told the story about the English 

47 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

private soldier who was placed under the shower-bath. 
Then the major told the story of the eleven Czecho- 
slovaks and the Hungarian corporal. After some more 
wine I told the story of the jockey who found the penny. 
The major said there was an Italian story something like 
that about the duchess who could not sleep at night. 
At this point the priest left and I told the story about 
the travelling salesman who arrived at five o’clock in 
the morning at Marseilles when the mistral was blowing. 
The major said he had heard a report that I could drink. 
I denied this. He said it was true and by the corpse of 
Bacchus we would test whether it was true or not. Not 
Bacchus, I said. Not Bacchus. Yes, Bacchus, he said. 
I should drink cup for cup and glass for glass with Bassi 
Fillipo Vincenza. Bassi said no that was no test because 
he had already drunk twice as much as 1. I said that was 
a foul lie and, Bacchus or no Bacchus, Fillipo Vicenza 
Bassi or Bassi Fillippo Vicenza had never touched a 
drop all evening and what was his name anyway? He 
said was my name Frederico Enrico or Enrico Federico? 
I said let the best man win, Bacchus barred, and the 
major started us with red wine in mugs. Half-way 
through the wine I did not want any more. I remem- 
bered where I was going. 

‘Bassi wins,’ I said. ‘He’s a better man than I am. 
I have to go.’ 

‘He does really,’ said Rinaldi. ‘He has a rendezvous. 
I know all about it.’ 

‘I have to go.’ 

‘Another night,’ said Bassi. ‘Another night when 
you feel stronger.’ Fie slapped me on the shoulder. 
There were lighted candles on the table. All the officers 
were very happy. ‘Good night, gentlemen,’ I said. 

48 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Rinaldi went out with me. We stood outside the 
door on the path and he said, ‘You’d better not go up 
there drunk.’ 

T’m not drunk, Rinin. Really.’ 

‘You’d better chew some coffee.’ 

‘Nonsense.’ 

‘I’ll get some, baby. You walk up and down.’ He 
came back with a handful of roasted coffee beans. 

‘Chew those, baby, and God be with you.’ 

‘Bacchus,’ I said. 

‘I’ll walk down with you,’ 

‘I’m perfectly all right.’ 

We walked along together through the town and I 
chewed the coffee. At the gate of the driveway that 
led up to the British villa, Rinaldi said good night. 

‘Good night,’ I said. ‘Why don’t you come in?’ 

He shook his head. ‘No,’ he said. ‘I like the simpler 
pleasures.’ 

‘Thank you for the coffee beans.’ 

‘Nothing, baby. Nothing.’ 

I started down the driveway. The outlines of the 
cypresses that lined it were sharp and clear. I looked 
back and saw Rinaldi standing watching me and waved 
to him. 

I sat in the reception hall of the villa waiting for 
Catherine Barkley to come down. Someone was coming 
down the hall-way. I stood up, but it was not Catherine. 
It was Miss Ferguson. 

‘Hello,’ she said. ‘Catherine asked me to tell you 
she was sorry she couldn’t see you this evening,’ 

‘I’m so sorry. I hope she’s not ill.’ 

‘She’s not awfully well,’ 

‘Will you tell her how sorry I am?’ 

D 49 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Yes, I will.’ 

‘Do you think it would be any good to try and see 
her to-morrow?’ 

‘Yes, I do.’ 

‘Thank you very much,’ I said. ‘Good night.’ 

I went out the door and suddenly I felt lonely and 
empty. I had treated seeing Catherine very lightly, I 
had gotten somewhat drunk and had nearly forgotten 
to come but when I could not see her there I was feeling 
lonely and hollow. 


CHAPTER 8 


The next afternoon we heard there was to be an attack 
up the river that night and that we were to take four 
cars there. Nobody knew anything about it although 
they all spoke with great positiveness and strategical 
knowledge. I was riding in the first car and as we passed 
the entry to the British hospital I told the driver to stop. 
The other cars pulled up. I got out and told the drivers 
to go on and that if we had not caught up to them at the 
junction of the road to Cormons to wait there. I hurried 
up the driveway and inside the reception hall I asked for 
Miss Barkley. 

‘She’s on duty.’ 

‘Could I see her just for a moment?’ 

They sent an orderly to see and she came back with him. 

‘I stopped to ask if you were better. They told me 
you were on duty, so I asked to see you.’ 

‘I’m quite well,’ she said, ‘I think the heat knocked me 
over yesterday.’ 


50 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T have to go.’ 

T’ll just step outside the door a minute.’ 

‘And you’re all right?’ I asked outside. 

‘Yes, darling. Are you coming to-night?’ 

‘No. I’m leaving now for a show up above Plava.’ 

‘A show?’ 

‘I don’t think it’s anjrthing.’ 

‘And you’ll be back?’ 

‘To-morrow.’ 

She was unclasping something from her neck. She 
put it in my hand. ‘It’s a Saint Anthony,’ she said. 
‘And come to-morrow night.’ 

‘You’re not a Catholic, are you?’ 

‘No. But they say a Saint Anthony’s very useful.’ 

‘I’ll take care of him for you. Good-bye.’ 

‘No,’ she said, ‘not good-bye.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Be a good boy and be careful. No, you can’t kiss 
me here. You can’t.’ 

‘All right.’ 

I looked back and saw her standing on the steps. 
She waved and I kissed my hand and held it out. She 
waved again and then I was out of the driveway and 
climbing up into the seat of the ambulance and we 
started. The Saint Anthony was in a little white metal 
capsule. I opened the capsule and spilled him out into 
my hand. 

‘Saint Anthony?’ asked the driver. 

‘Yes.’ 

‘I have one.’ His right hand left the wheel and opened 
a button on his tunic and pulled it out from under his 
shirt. 

‘See?’ 

51 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


I put my Saint Anthony back in the capsule, spilled 
the thin gold chain together and put it all in my breast 
pocket. 

‘You don’t wear him?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘It’s better to wear him. That’s what it’s for.’ 

‘All right,’ I said. I undid the clasp of the gold cbain 
and put it around my neck and clasped it. The saint 
hung down on the outside of my uniform and I undid 
the throat of my tunic, unbuttoned the shirt collar and 
dropped him in under the shirt. I felt him in his metal 
box against my chest while we drove. Then I forgot 
about him. After I was wounded I never found him. 
Someone probably got it at one of the dressing-stations. 

We drove fast when we were over the bridge and 
soon we saw the dust of the other cars ahead down the 
road. The road curved and we saw the three cars look- 
ing quite small, the dust rising from the wheels and 
going off through the trees. We caught them and passed 
them and turned off on a road that climbed up into the 
hills. Driving in convoy is not unpleasant if you are 
the first car and I settled back in the seat and watched 
the country. We were in the foot-hills on the near side 
of the river and as the road mounted there were the 
high mountains off to the north with snow still on the 
tops. I looked back and saw the three cars all climbing, 
spaced by the interval of their dust. We passed a long 
column of loaded mules, the drivers walking along beside 
the mules wearing red fezes. They were bersaglieri. 

Beyond the mule train the road was empty and we 
climbed through the hills and then went down over the 
shoulder of a long hill into a river-valley. There were 
trees along both sides of the road and through the right 

52 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

line of trees I saw the river, the water clear, fast and 
shallow. The river was low and there were stretches 
of sand and pebbles with a narrow channel of water 
and sometimes the water spread like a sheen over the 
pebbly bed. Close to the bank I saw deep pools, the 
water blue like the sky. I saw arched stone bridges 
over the river where tracks turned off from the road 
and we passed stone farmhouses with pear trees can- 
delabraed against their south walls and low stone walls 
in the fields. The road went up the valley a long way 
and then we turned off and commenced to climb into the 
hills again. The road climbed steeply going up and back 
and forth through chestnut woods to level finally along 
a ridge. I could look down through the woods and see, 
far below, with the sun on it, the line of the river that 
separated the two armies. We went along the rough 
new military road that followed the crest of the ridge 
and I looked to the north at the two ranges of moun- 
tains, green and dark to the snow-line and then white 
and lovely in the sun. Then, as the road mounted along 
the ridge, I saw a third range of mountains, higher 
snow mountains, that looked chalky white and fur- 
rowed, with strange planes, and then there were moun- 
tains far off beyond all these, that you could hardly tell 
if you really saw. Those were all the Austrians’ moun- 
tains and we had nothing like them. Ahead there was a 
rounded turn-off in the road to the right and looking 
down I could see the road dropping through the trees. 
There were troops on this road and motor trucks and 
mules with mountain-guns and as we went down, keeping 
to the side, I could see the river far down below, the 
line of ties and rails running along it, the old bridge 
where the railway crossed to the other side and across, 

53 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


under a hill beyond the river, the broken houses of the 
little town that was to be taken. 

It was nearly dark when we came down and turned 
on to the main road that ran beside the river. 


CHAPTER 9 

The road was crowded and there were screens of corn 
stalk and straw matting on both sides and matting over 
the top so that it was like the entrance at a circus or a 
native village. We drove slowly in this matting-covered 
tunnel and came out on to a bare cleared space where 
the railway station had been. The road here was below 
the level of the river bank and all along the side of the 
sunken road there were holes dug in the bank with 
infantry in them. The sun was going down and looking 
up along the bank as we drove I saw the Austrian obser- 
vation balloons above the hills on the other side dark 
against the sunset. We parked the cars beyond a brick- 
yard. The ovens and some deep holes had been equipped 
as dressing-stations. There were three doctors that I 
knew. I talked with the major and learned that when 
it should start and our cars should be loaded we would 
drive them back along the screened road and up to the 
main road along the ridge where there would be a post 
and other cars to clear them. He hoped the road would 
not jam. It was a one-road show. The road was screened 
because it was in sight of the Austrians across the river. 
Here at the brickyard we were sheltered from rifle or 
machine-gun fire by the river bank. There was one 

54 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


smashed bridge across the river. They were going to 
put over another bridge when the bombardment started 
and some troops were to cross at the shallows up above 
at the bend of the river. The major was a little man 
with upturned moustaches. He had been in the war 
in Libya and wore two wound-stripes. He said that 
if the thing went well he would see that I was decorated. 
I said I hoped it would go well but that he was too kind. 
I asked him if there was a big dugout where the drivers 
could stay and he sent a soldier to show me. I went 
with him and found the dugout, which was very good. 
The drivers were pleased with it and I left them there. 
The major asked me to have a drink with him and two 
other officers. We drank rum and it was very friendly. 
Outside it was getting dark. I asked what time the 
attack was to be and they said as soon as it was dark. I 
went back to the drivers. They were sitting in the dug- 
out talking and when I came in they stopped. I gave 
them each a package of cigarettes, Macedonias, loosely 
packed cigarettes that spilled tobacco and needed to have 
the ends twisted before you smoked them, Manera lit 
his lighter and passed it around. The lighter was shaped 
like a Fiat radiator, I told them what I had heard. 

‘Why didn’t we see the post when we came down?’ 
Passini asked. 

Tt was just beyond where we turned off.’ 

‘That road will be a dirty mess,’ Manera said. 

‘They’ll shell hell out of us.’ 

‘Probably.’ 

‘What about eating, lieutenant? We won’t get a chance 
to eat after this thing starts.’ 

‘I’ll go and see now,’ I said. 

‘You want us to stay here or can we look around?’ 

55 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Better stay here.’ 

I weat back to the major’s dugout and he said the field 
kitchen would be along and the drivers could come and 
get their stew. He would loan them mess tins if they did 
not have them. I said I thought they had them. I went 
back and told the drivers I would get them as soon as the 
food came. Manera said he hoped it would come before 
the bombardment started. They were silent until I went 
out. They were all mechanics and hated the war. 

I went out to look at the cars and see what was going 
on and then came back and sat down in the dugout with 
the four drivers. We sat on the ground with our backs 
against the wall and smoked. Outside it was nearly dark. 
The earth of the dugout was warm and dry and I let my 
shoulders back against the wall, sitting on the small of 
my back, and relaxed. 

‘Who goes to the attack?’ asked Gavuzzi. 

‘Bersaglieri.’ 

‘All bersaglieri?’ 

‘I think so.’ 

‘There aren’t enough troops here for a real attack.’ 

‘It is probably to draw attention from where the real 
attack will be.’ 

‘Do the men know that who attack?’ 

‘I don’t think so.’ 

‘Of course they don’t,’ Manera said. ‘They wouldn’t 
attack if they did.’ 

‘Yes they would,’ Passini said. ‘Bersaglieri are fools.’ 

‘They are brave and have good discipline,’ I said. 

‘They are big through the chest by measurement, and 
healthy. But they are still fools.’ 

‘The granatieri are tall,’ Manera said. This was a 
joke. They all laughed. 

56 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Were you there, Tenente, when they wouldn't attack 
and they shot every tenth man?' 

‘No.’ 

‘It is true. They lined them up afterward and took 
every tenth man. Carabinieri shot them.’ 

‘Carabinieri,’ said Passini and spat on the floor. ‘But 
those grenadiers; all over six feet. They wouldn’t attack.’ 

‘If everybody would not attack the war would be over,’ 
Manera said. 

‘It wasn’t that way with the granatieri. They were 
afraid. The officers all came from such good families.’ 

‘Some of the officers went alone.’ 

‘A sergeant shot two officers who would not get 
out.’ 

‘Some troops went out,’ 

‘Those that went out were not lined up when they 
took the tenth men.’ 

‘One of those shot by the carabinieri is from my 
town,’ Passini said. ‘He was a big smart tall boy to be 
in the granatieri. Always in Rome. Always with the 
girls. Always with the carabinieri.’ He laughed. ‘Now 
they have a guard outside his house with a bayonet and 
nobody can come to see his mother and father and sisters 
and his father loses his civil rights and cannot even vote. 
They are all without law to protect them. Anybody can 
take their property.’ 

‘If it wasn’t that that happens to their families nobody 
would go to the attack.’ 

‘Yes. Alpini would. These V.E. soldiers would. 
Some bersaglieri.’ 

‘Bersaglieri have run too. Now they try to forget it.’ 

‘You should not let us talk this way, Tenente. Evviva 
I’esercito,’ Passini said sarcastically. 

57 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T know how you talk,’ I said. ‘But as long as you 
drive the cars and behave — ’ 

‘ - and don’t talk so other officers can hear,’ Manera 
finished. 

‘I believe we should get the war over,’ I said. ‘It would 
not finish it if one side stopped fighting. It would only 
be worse if we stopped fighting.’ 

‘It could not be worse,’ Passini said respectfully. 
‘There is nothing worse than war.’ 

‘Defeat is worse.’ 

‘I do not believe it,’ Passini said still respectfully. 
‘What is defeat? You go home.’ 

‘They come after you. They take your home. They 
take your sisters.’ 

‘I don’t believe it,’ Passini said. ‘They can’t do that 
to everybody. Let everybody defend his home. Let 
them keep their sisters in the house.’ 

‘They hang you. They come and make you be a 
soldier again. Not in the auto-ambulance, in the in- 
fantry.’ 

‘They can’t hang every one.’ 

‘An outside nation can’t make you be a soldier,’ Manera 
said. ‘At the first battle you all run.’ 

‘Like the Tchecos.’ 

‘I think you do not know an3rthing about being con- 
quered and so you think it is not bad.’ 

‘Tenente,’ Passini said. ‘We understand you let us 
talk. Listen. There is nothing as bad as war. We in 
the auto-ambulance cannot even realize at all how bad 
it is. When people realize how bad it is they cannot do 
anything to stop it because they go crazy. There are 
some people who never realize. There are people who are 
afraid of their officers. It is with them that war is made.’ 

S8 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T know it is bad but we must finish it.’ 

Tt doesn’t finish. There is no finish to a war.’ 

‘Yes there is.’ 

Passini shook his head. 

‘War is not won by victory. What if we take San 
Gabriele? What if we take the Carso and Monfalcone 
and Trieste? Where are we then? Did you see all the 
far mountains to-day? Do you think we could take all 
them too? Only if the Austrians stop fighting. One 
side must stop fighting. Why don’t we stop fighting? 
If they come down into Italy they will get tired and go 
away. They have their own country. But no, instead 
there is a war.’ 

‘You’re an orator.’ 

‘We think. We read. We are not peasants. We are 
mechanics. But even the peasants know better than to 
believe in a war. Everybody hates this war.’ 

‘There is a class that controls a country that is stupid 
and does not realize anything and never can. That is 
why we have this war.’ 

‘Also they make money out of it.’ 

‘Most of them don’t,’ said Passini. ‘They are too 
stupid. They do it for nothing. For stupidity.’ 

‘We must shut up,’ said Manera. ‘We talk too much 
even for the Tenente.’ 

‘He likes it,’ said Passini. ‘We will convert him.’ 

‘But now we will shut up,’ Manera said. 

‘Do we eat yet, Tenente?’ Gavuzzi asked. 

‘I will go and see,’ I said. Gordini stood up and went 
outside with me. 

‘Is there anything I can do, Tenente? Can I help in 
any way?’ He was the quietest one of the four. 

‘Come with me if you want,’ I said, ‘and we’ll see.’ 

59 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

It was dark outside and the long light from the search- 
lights was moving over the mountains. There were 
big searchlights on that front mounted on camions 
that you passed sometimes on the roads at night, close 
behind the lines, the camion stopped a little off the 
road, an officer directing the light and the crew scared. 
We crossed the brickyard, and stopped at the main 
dressing-station. There was a little shelter of green 
branches outside over the entrance and in the dark the 
night wind rustled the leaves dried by the sun. Inside 
there was a light. The major was at the telephone sitting 
on a box. One of the medical captains said the attack 
had been put forward an hour. He offered me a glass 
of cognac. I looked at the board tables, the instruments 
shining in the light, the basins and the stoppered bottles. 
Gordini stood behind me. The major got up from the 
telephone. 

Tt starts now,’ he said. ‘It has been put back again.’ 

I looked outside, it was dark and the Austrian search- 
lights were moving on the mountains behind us. It was 
quiet for a moment still, then from all the guns behind 
us the bombardment started. 

‘Savoia,’ said the major. 

‘About the soup, major,’ I said. He did not hear me. 
I repeated it. 

‘It hasn’t come up.’ 

A big shell came in and burst outside in the brick- 
yard. Another burst and in the noise you could hear 
the smaller noise of the brick and dirt raining down. 

‘What is there to eat?’ 

‘We have a little pasta asciutta,’ the major said. 

‘I’ll take what you can give me.’ 

The major spoke to an orderly who went out of sight 

6o 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

in the back and came back with a metal basin of cold 
cooked macaroni. I handed it to Gordini, 

‘Have you any cheese?’ 

The major spoke grudgingly to the orderly who ducked 
back into the hole again and came out with a quarter 
of a white cheese. 

‘Thank you very much,’ I said. 

‘You’d better not go out.’ 

Outside something was set down beside the entrance. 
One of the two men who had carried it looked in. 

‘Bring him in,’ said the major. ‘What’s the matter 
with you? Do you want us to come outside and get 
him?’ 

The two stretcher-bearers picked up the man under 
the arms and by the legs and brought him in. 

‘Slit the tunic,’ the major said. 

He held a forceps with some gauze in the end. The 
two captains took off their coats. ‘Get out of here,’ the 
major said to the two stretcher-bearers. 

‘Come on,’ I said to Gordini. 

‘You better wait until the shelling is over,’ the major 
said over his shoulder. 

‘They want to eat,’ I said. 

‘As you wish.’ 

Outside we ran across the brickyard. A shell burst 
short near the river bank. Then there was one that we 
did not hear coming until the sudden rush. We both 
went flat and with the flash and bump of the burst and 
the smell heard the singing off of the fragments and the 
rattle of falling brick. Gordini got up and ran for the 
dugout. I was after him, holding the cheese, its smooth 
surface covered with brick dust. Inside the dugout were 
the three drivers sitting against the wall, smoking. 

6i 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Here, you patriots,’ I said. 

‘How are the cars?’ Manera asked. 

‘All right.’ 

‘Did they scare you, Tenente?’ 

‘You’re damned right,’ I said. 

I took out my loiife, opened it, wiped off the blade 
and pared off the dirty outside surface of the cheese. 
Gavuzzi handed me the basin of macaroni. 

‘Start in to eat, Tenente.’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘Put it on the floor. We’ll all eat.’ 

‘There are no forks.’ 

‘What the hell,’ I said in English. 

I cut the cheese into pieces and laid them on the 
macaroni. 

‘Sit down to it,’ I said. They sat down and waited. 
I put thumb and fingers into the macaroni and lifted. A 
mass loosened, 

‘Lift it high, Tenente.’ 

I lifted it to arm’s length and the strands cleared. I 
lowered it into the mouth, sucked and snapped in the 
ends, and chewed, then took a bite of cheese, chewed, 
and then a drink of the wine. It tasted of rusty metal. 
I handed the canteen back to Passini. 

‘It’s rotten,’ he said. ‘It’s been in there too long. I 
had it in the car.’ 

They were all eating, holding their chins close over 
the basin, tipping their heads back, sucking in the ends. 
I took another mouthful and some cheese and a rinse of 
wine. Something landed outside that shook the earth. 

Four hundred twenty or minnenwerfer,’ Gavuzzi 
said. 

_ There aren t any four hundred twenties in the moun- 
tains,’ I said. 


62 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘They have big Skoda guns. I’ve seen the holes.’ 

‘Three hundred fives.’ 

We went on eating. There was a cough, a noise like 
a railway engine starting and then an explosion that 
shook the earth again. 

‘This isn’t a deep dugout,’ Passini said. 

‘That was a big trench-mortar.’ 

‘Yes, sir.’ 

I ate the end of my piece of cheese and took a swallow 
of wine. Through the other noise I heard a cough, 
then came the chuh-chuh-chuh-chuh - then there was a 
flash, as a blast-furnace door is swung open, and a roar 
that started white and went red and on and on in a 
rushing wind. I tried to breathe but my breath would 
not come and I felt myself rush bodily out of myself 
and out and out and out and all the time bodily in the 
wind. I went out swiftly, all of myself and I knew I 
was dead and that it had all been a mistake to think you 
just died. Then I floated, and instead of going on I felt 
myself slide back. I breathed and I was back. The 
ground was torn up and in front of my head there was 
a splintered beam of wood. In the jolt of my head I 
heard somebody crying. I thought somebody was 
screaming. I tried to move but I could not move. I 
heard the machine-guns and rifles firing across the river 
and all along the river. There was a great splashing and 
I saw the star-shells go up and burst and float whitely 
and rockets going up and heard the bombs, all this in a 
moment, and then I heard close to me someone saying, 
‘Mama mia! Oh, mama mia!’ I pulled and twisted 
and got my legs loose finally and turned around and 
touched him. It was Passini and when I touched him 
he screamed. His legs were toward me and I saw in 

63 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


the dark and the light that they were both smashed 
above the knee. One leg was gone and the other was 
held by tendons and part of the trouser and the stump 
twitched and jerked as though it were not connected. 
He bit his arm and moaned, ^Oh, mama mia, mama 
mia,’ then, ^Dio te salve, Maria. Dio te salve, Maria. 
Oh Jesus shoot me Christ shoot me, Mama mia, mama 
mia, oh purest lovely Mary shoot me. Stop it. Stop it. 
Stop it. Oh Jesus lovely Mary stop it. Oh oh oh oh,’ 
then choking, ‘Mama mama mia.’ Then he was quiet, 
biting his arm, the stump of his leg twitching. 

Torta feriti!’ I shouted holding my hands cupped. 
‘Porta feriti!’ I tried to get closer to Passini to try to put 
a tourniquet on the legs but I could not move. I tried 
again and my legs moved a little. I could pull back- 
ward along with my arms and elbows. Passini was 
quiet now, I sat beside him, undid my tunic and tried 
to rip the tail of my shirt. It would not rip and I bit 
the edge of the cloth to start it. Then I thought of his 
puttees. I had on wool stockings but Passini wore puttees. 
All the drivers wore puttees. But Passini had only one 
leg. I unwound the puttee and while I was doing it I 
saw there was no need to try and make a tourniquet 
because he was dead already. I made sure he was dead. 
There were three others to locate. I sat up straight and 
as I did so something inside my head moved like the 
weights on a doll’s eyes and it hit me inside behind my 
eyeballs. My legs felt warm and wet and my shoes were 
wet and warm inside. I knew that I was hit and leaned 
over and put my hand on my knee. My knee wasn’t 
there. My hand went in and my knee was down on my 
shin. I wiped my hand on my shirt and another floating 
light came very slowly down and I looked at my leg and 

64 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


was very afraid. 'Oh, God/ I said, 'get me out of here.' 
I knew, however, that there had been three others. There 
were four drivers. Passini was dead. That left three. 
Someone took hold of me under the arms and somebody 
else lifted my legs. 

'There are three others/ I said. 'One is dead.' 

Tt's Manera. We went for a stretcher but there 
wasn’t any. How are you, Tenente?’ 

'Where are Gordini and Gavuzzi?' 

‘Gordini’s at the post getting bandaged. Gavuzzi 
has your legs. Hold on to my neck, Tenente. Are you 
badly hit?’ 

‘In the leg. How is Gordini?’ 

'He’s all right. It was a big trench-mortar shell.’ 

'Passini’s dead.’ 

'Yes. He’s dead.’ 

A shell fell close and they both dropped to the ground 
and dropped me. 'I’m sorry, Tenente,’ said Manera. 
'Hang on to my neck.’ 

'If you drop me again.’ 

'It was because we were scared.’ 

'Are you unwounded?’ 

'We are both wounded a little.’ 

'Can Gordini drive?’ 

'I don’t think so.’ 

They dropped me once more before we reached the 
post. 

'You sons of bitches,’ I said. 

'I am sorry, Tenente/ Manera said. ‘We won’t drop 
you again.’ 

Outside the post a great many of us lay on the ground 
in the dark. They carried wounded in and brought 
them out. I could see the light come out from the dressing- 
E 6s 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

station when the curtain opened and they brought some- 
one in or out. The dead were off to one side. The 
doctors were working with their sleeves up to their 
shoulders and were red as butchers. There were not 
enough stretchers. Some of the wounded were noisy 
but most were quiet. The wind blew the leaves in the 
bower over the door of the dressing-station and the night 
was getting cold. Stretcher-bearers came in all the 
tim e, put their stretchers down, unloaded them and 
went away. As soon as I got to the dressing-station 
Manera brought a medical sergeant out and he put 
bandages on both my legs. He said there was so much 
dirt blown into the wound that there had not been much 
haemorrhage. They would take me as soon as possible. 
He went back inside. Gordini could not drive, Manera 
said. His shoulder was smashed and his head was hurt. 
He had not felt bad but now the shoulder had stiffened. 
He was sitting up beside one of the brick walls. Manera 
and Gavuzzi each went off with a load of wounded. 
They could drive all right. The British had come with 
three ambulances and they had two men on each ambu- 
lance. One of their drivers came over to me, brought by 
Gordini who looked very white and sick. The Britisher 
leaned over. 

‘Are you hit badly?’ he asked. He was a tall man and 
wore steel-rimmed spectacles. 

‘In the legs.’ 

‘It’s not serious, I hope. Will you have a cigarette?’ 

‘Thanks.’ 

‘They tell me you’ve lost two drivers.’ 

‘Yes. One killed and the fellow that brought you.’ 

‘What rotten luck. Would you like us to take the 
cars?’ 


66 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘That^s what I wanted to ask you/ 

‘We’d take quite good care of them and return them 
to the Villa. 206, aren’t you?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

Tt’s a charming place. I’ve seen you about. They 
tell me you’re an American,’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Fm English.’ 

‘No!’ 

‘Yes, English. Did you think I was Italian? There 
were some Italians with one of our units.’ 

‘It would be fine if you would take the cars,’ I said. 

‘We’ll be most careful of them,’ he straightened up. 
‘This chap of yours was very anxious for me to see you.’ 
He patted Gordini on the shoulder. Gordini winced and 
smiled. The Englishman broke into voluble and perfect 
Italian. ‘Now everything is arranged. I’ve seen your 
Tenente. We will take over the two cars. You won’t 
worry now.’ He broke off, ‘I must do something about 
getting you out of here. I’ll see the medical wallahs. 
We’ll take you back with us.’ 

He walked across to the dressing-station, stepping 
carefully among the wounded. I saw the blanket open, 
the light came out and he went in. 

‘He will look after you, Tenente,’ Gordini said. 

‘How are you. Franco?’ 

‘I am all right.’ He sat down beside me. In a moment 
the blanket in front of the dressing-station opened and 
two stretcher-bearers came out followed by the tall 
Englishman. He brought them over to me. 

‘Here is the American Tenente,’ he said in Italian. 

‘I’d rather wait,’ I said. ‘There are much worse 
wounded than me, I’m all right.’ 

67 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Come, come,’ he said. ‘Don’t be a bloody hero.’ 
Then in Italian: ‘Lift him very carefully about the legs. 
His legs are very painful. He is the legitimate son of 
President Wilson.’ They picked me up and took me into 
the dressing-room. Inside they were operating on all the 
tables. The little major looked at us furious. Fie recog- 
nized me and waved a forceps. 

‘Qa va bien?’ 

‘ga va.’ 

‘I have brought him in,’ the tall Englishman said in 
Italian. ‘The only son of the American Ambassador. 
He will be here until you are ready to take him. Then I 
shall take him with my first load.’ He bent over me. 
‘I’ll look up their adjutant to do your papers and it will 
all go much faster.’ He stooped to go under the door- 
way and went out. The major was unhooking the for- 
ceps now, dropping them in a basin. I followed his hands 
with my eyes. Now he was bandaging. Then the stretcher- 
bearers took the man off the table. 

‘I’ll take the American Tenente,’ one of the captains 
said. They lifted me on to the table. It was hard and 
slippery. There were many strong smells, chemical 
smells and the sweet smell of blood. They took off my 
trousers and the medical captain commenced dictating 
to the sergeant-adjutant while he w^orked, ‘Multiple 
superficial wounds of the left and right thigh and left 
and right knee and right foot. Profound wounds of 
right knee and foot. Lacerations of the scalp’ - he probed - 
(Does that hurt?) (Christ, yes!) ‘with possible fracture of 
the skull. Incurred in the line of duty. That’s what 
keeps you from being court-martialled for self-inflicted 
wounds,’ he said. ‘Would you like a drink of brandy? 
How did you run into this thing anyway? What w^ere you 

68 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

trying to do? Commit suicide? Anti-tetanus please, and 
mark a cross on both legs. Thank you. Vll clean this up 
a little, wash it out, and put on a dressing. Your blood 
coagulates beautifally.’ 

The adjutant, looking up from the paper, 'What in- 
flicted the wounds?’ 

The medical captain, 'What hit you?’ 

Me, with the eyes shut, 'A trench-mortar shell.’ 

The captain, doing things that hurt sharply and severing 
tissue - 'Are you sure?’ 

Me - trying to lie still and feeling my stomach flutter 
when the flesh was cut, 'I think so.’ 

Captain doctor - (interested in something he was 
finding), 'Fragments of enemy trench-mortar shell. 
Now I’ll probe for some of this if you like but it’s not 
necessary. I’ll paint all this and - Does that sting? 
Good, that’s nothing to how it will feel later. The pain 
hasn’t started yet. Bring him a glass of brandy. The 
shock dulls the pain; but this is all right, you have nothing 
to worry’’ about if it doesn’t infect and it rarely does now. 
How is your head?’ 

'It’s very bad,’ I said. 

‘Better not drink too much brandy then. If you’ve 
got a fracture you don’t want inflammation. How does 
that feel?’ 

Sweat ran all over me. 

'Good Christ!’ I said. 

'I guess you’ve got a fracture all right. I’ll wrap 
you up and don’t bounce your head around.’ He ban- 
daged, his hands moving very fast and the bandage coming 
taut and sure. 'All right, good luck and Vive la France.’ 

'He’s an American,’ one of the other captains said. 

'I thought you said he was a Frenchman. He talks 

69 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

French,’ the captain said. ‘I’ve known him before. I 
always thought he was French.’ He drank a half tumbler 
of cognac. ‘Bring on something serious. Get some 
more of that anti-tetanus.’ The captain waved to me. 
They lifted me and the blanket-flap went across my 
face as we went out. Outside the sergeant-adjutant 
knelt down beside me where I lay, ‘Name?’ he asked 
softly. ‘Middle name? First name? Rank? Where 
born? What class? What corps?’ and so on. ‘I’m sorry 
for your head, Tenente. I hope you feel better. I’m 
sending you now with the English ambulance.’ 

‘I’m all right,’ I said. ‘Thank you very much.’ The 
pain that the major had spoken about had started and 
all that was happening was without interest or relation. 
After a while the English ambulance came up and they 
put me on to a stretcher and lifted the stretcher up to 
the ambulance level and shoved it in. There was another 
stretcher by the side with a man on it whose nose I could 
see, waxy-looking, out of the bandages. He breathed 
very heavily. There were stretchers lifted and slid into 
the slings above. The tall English driver came around 
and looked in. ‘I’ll take it very easily,’ he said. ‘I hope 
you’ll be comfy.’ I felt the engine start, felt him climb 
up into the front seat, felt the brake come off and the 
clutch go in, then we started. I lay still and let the pain 
ride. 

As the ambulance climbed along the road, it was slow 
in the traffic, sometimes it stopped, sometimes it backed 
on a turn, then finally it climbed quite fast. I felt some- 
thing dripping. At first it dropped slowly and regularly, 
then it pattered into a stream. I shouted to the driver. 
He stopped the car and looked in through the hole behind 
his seat. 


70 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘What is it?^ 

‘The man on the stretcher over me has a hemorrhage.’ 

‘We’re not far from the top. I wouldn’t be able to 
get the stretcher out alone.’ He started the car. The 
stream kept on. In the dark I could not see where it 
came from the canvas overhead. I tried to move side- 
ways so that it did not fall on me. Where it had run 
down under my shirt it was warm and sticky. I was 
cold and my leg hurt so that it made me sick. After a 
while the stream from the stretcher above lessened and 
started to drip again and I heard and felt the canvas 
above move as the man on the stretcher settled more 
comfortably. 

‘How is he?’ the Englishman called back. ‘We’re 
almost up.’ 

‘He’s dead I think,’ I said. 

The drops fell very slowly, as they fall from an icicle 
after the sun has gone. It was cold in the car in the 
night as the road climbed. At the post on the top they 
took the stretcher out and put another in and we went on. 


CHAPTER lo 


In the ward at the field hospital they told me a visitor 
was coming to see me in the afternoon. It was a hot 
day and there were many flies in the room. My orderly 
had cut paper into strips and tied the strips to a stick to 
make a brush that swished the flies away. I watched 
them settle on the ceiling. When he stopped swishing 
and fell asleep they came down and I blew them away 

71 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

and finally covered my face with my hands and slept 
too. It was very hot and when I woke my legs itched. 
I waked the orderly and he poured mineral water on the 
dressings. That made the bed damp and cool. Those of 
us that were awake talked across the ward. The after- 
noon was a quiet time. In the morning they came to 
each bed in turn, three men nurses and a doctor and 
picked you up out of bed and carried you into the 
dressing-room so that the beds could be made while 
we were having our wounds dressed. It was not a 
pleasant trip to the dressing-room and I did not know 
until later that beds could be made with men in them. 
My orderly had finished pouring water and the bed felt 
cool and lovely and I was telling him where to scratch 
on the soles of my feet against the itching when one 
of the doctors brought in Rinaldi. He came in very fast 
and bent down over the bed and kissed me. I saw he 
wore gloves. 

‘How are you, baby? How do you feel? I bring you 
this - ’ It was a bottle of cognac. The orderly brought 
a chair and he sat down, ‘and good news. You will be 
decorated. They want to get you the medaglia d’argento 
but perhaps they can get only the bronze.’ 

‘What for?’ 

‘Because you are gravely wounded. They say if you 
can prove you did any heroic act you can get the silver. 
Otherwise it will be the bronze. Tell me exactly what 
happened. Did you do any heroic act?’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘I was blown up while we were eating 
cheese.’ 

‘Be serious. You must have done something heroic 
either before or after. Remember carefully.’ 

‘I did not.’ 


72 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Didn’t you carry anybody on your back? Gordini 
says you carried several people on your back but the 
medical major at the first post declares it is impossible. 
He has to sign the proposition for the citation.’ 

T didn’t carry anybody. I couldn’t move.’ 

‘That doesn’t matter,’ said Rinaldi. 

He took off his gloves. 

T think we can get you the silver. Didn’t you refuse 
to be medically aided before the others?’ 

‘Not very firmly.’ 

‘That doesn’t matter. Look how you are wounded. 
Look at your valorous conduct in asking to go always 
to the first line. Besides, the operation was successful.’ 

‘Did they cross the river all right?’ 

‘Enormously. They take nearly a thousand prisoners. 
It’s in the bulletin. Didn’t you see it?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘I’ll bring it to you. It is a successful coup de main.’ 

‘How is everj^hing?’ 

‘Splendid. We are all splendid. Everybody is proud 
of you. Tell me just exactly how it happened. I am 
positive you will get the silver. Go on tell me. Tell me 
all about it.’ He paused and thought. ‘Maybe you will 
get an English medal too. There was an English there. 
I’ll go and see him and ask if he will recommend you. 
He ought to be able to do something. Do you suffer 
much? Have a drink. Orderly, go get a corkscrew. 
Oh you should see what I did in the removal of three 
metres of small intestine and better now than ever. It 
is one for The Lancet. You do me a translation and I 
will send it to The Lancet. Every day I am better. Poor 
dear baby, how do you feel? Where is that damn cork- 
screw? You are so brave and quiet I forget you are 

73 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

suffering.’ He slapped his gloves on the edge of the 
bed. 

‘Here is the corkscrew, Signor Tenente,’ the orderly 
said. 

‘Open the bottle. Bring a glass. Drink that, baby. 
How is your poor head? I looked at your papers. You 
haven’t any fracture. That major at the first post was 
a hog-butcher. I would take you and never hurt you. 
I never hurt anybody. I learn how to do it. Every day 
I learn to do things smoother and better. You must 
forgive me for talking so much, baby. I am very moved 
to see you badly wounded. There, drink that. It’s 
good. It cost fifteen lire. It ought to be good. Five 
stars. After I leave here I’ll go see that English and 
he’ll get you an English medal.’ 

‘They don’t give them like that.’ 

‘You are so modest. I will send the liaison officer. 
He can handle the English.’ 

‘Have you seen Miss Barkley?’ 

‘I will bring her here. I will go now and bring her here.’ 

‘Don’t go,’ I said. ‘Tell me about Gorizia. How are 
the girls?’ 

‘There are no girls. For two weeks now they haven’t 
changed them. I don’t go there any more. It is dis- 
graceful. They aren’t girls; they are old war comrades.’ 

‘You don’t go at all?’ 

‘I just go to see if there is anything new. I stop by. 
They all ask for you. It is a disgrace that they should 
stay so long that they become friends.’ 

‘Maybe girls don’t want to go to the front any more.’ 

‘Of course they do. They have plenty of girls. It is 
just bad administration. They are keeping them for the 
pleasure of dugout hiders in the rear.’ 

74 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Poor Rinaldi,’ I said. ‘All alone at the war with no 
new girls.’ 

Rinaldi poured himself another glass of the cognac. 

‘I don’t think it will hurt you, baby. You take it.’ 

I drank the cognac and felt it warm all the way down. 
Rinaldi poured another glass. He was quieter now. 
He held up the glass. ‘To your valorous wounds. To 
the silver medal. Tell me, baby, when you lie here all 
the time in the hot weather don’t you get excited?’ 

‘Sometimes.’ 

‘I can’t imagine lying like that. I would go crazy.’ 

‘You are crazy.’ 

‘I wish you were back. No one to come in at night 
from adventures. No one to make fun of. No one to 
lend me money. No blood brother and room mate. 
Why do you get yourself wounded?’ 

‘You can make fun of the priest.’ 

‘That priest. It isn’t me that makes fun of him. It is 
the captain. I like him. If you must have a priest have 
that priest. He’s coming to see you. He makes big 
preparations.’ 

‘I like him.’ 

‘Oh, I knew it. Sometimes I think you and he are 
a little that way. You know.’ 

‘No, you don’t.’ 

‘Yes, I do sometimes. A little that way like the number 
of the first regiment of the Brigata Ancona.’ 

‘Oh, go to hell.’ 

He stood up and put on his gloves. 

‘Oh, I love to tease you, baby. With your priest and 
your English girl, and really you are just like me under- 
neath.’ 

‘No, I’m not.’ 


75 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Yes, we are. You are really an Italian. All fire and 
smoke and nothing inside. You only pretend to be 
American. We are brothers and we love each other.’ 

‘Be good while I’m gone,’ I said. 

T will send Miss Barkley. You are better with her 
without me. You are purer and sweeter.’ 

‘Oh, go to hell.’ 

‘I will send her. Your lovely cool goddess. English 
goddess. My God, what would a man do with a woman 
like that except worship her? What else is an English- 
woman good for?’ 

‘You are an ignorant foul-mouthed dago.’ 

‘A what?’ 

‘An ignorant wop.’ 

‘Wop. You are a frozen-faced . . . w’op.’ 

‘You are ignorant. Stupid.’ I saw that word pricked 
him and kept on. ‘Uninformed. Inexperienced, stupid 
from inexperience.’ 

‘Truly? I tell you something about your good women. 
Your goddesses. There is only one difference between 
taking a girl w^ho has always been good and a woman. 
With a girl it is painful. That’s all I know.’ He slapped 
the bed with his glove. ‘And you never know if the girl 
will really like it.’ 

‘Don’t get angry.’ 

‘I’m not angry. I just tell you, baby, for your own 
good. To save you trouble.’ 

‘That’s the only difference?’ 

‘Yes. But millions of fools like you don’t know it.’ 

‘You were sweet to tell me.’ 

‘We won’t quarrel, baby. I love you too much. But 
don’t be a fool.’ 

‘No. I’ll be wise like you.’ 

76 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Don’t be ^ngry, baby. Laugh. Take a drink. I 
must go, really.’ 

'You’re a good old boy.’ 

'Now you see. Underneath we are the same. We 
are war brothers. Kiss me good-bye.’ 

'You’re sloppy.’ 

'No. I am just more affectionate.’ 

I felt his breath come toward me. 'Good-bye. I 
come to see you again soon.’ His breath went away. 
'I won’t kiss you if you don’t want. I’ll send your English 
girl. Good-bye, baby. The cognac is under the bed. 
Get well soon.’ 

He was gone. 


CHAPTER II 


It was dusk when the priest came. They had brought 
the soup and afterward taken away the bowls and I was 
lying looking at the rows of beds and out the window 
at the tree-top that moved a little in the evening breeze. 
The breeze came in through the window and it was 
cooler with the evening. The flies were on the ceiling 
now and on the electric light bulbs that hung on wires. 
The lights were only turned on when someone was 
brought in at night or when something was being done. 
It made me feel very young to have the dark come after 
the dusk and then remain. It was like being put to bed 
after early supper. The orderly came down between the 
beds and stopped. Someone was with him. It was the 
priest. He stood there small, brown-faced, and em- 
barrassed. 


77 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘How do you do?’ he asked. He put some packages 
down by the bed, on the floor. 

‘All right, father.’ 

He sat down in the chair that had been brought for 
Rinaldi and looked out of the window embarrassedly. 
I noticed his face looked very tired. 

‘I can only stay a minute,’ he said. ‘It is late.’ 

‘It’s not late. How is the mess?’ 

He smiled. ‘I am still a great joke.’ He sounded tired 
too. ‘Thank God they are all well.’ 

‘I am so glad you are all right,’ he said. ‘I hope you 
don’t suffer.’ He seemed very tired and I was not used 
to see him tired. 

‘Not any more.’ 

‘I miss you at the mess.’ 

‘I wish I were there. I always enjoyed our talking.’ 

‘I brought you a few little things,’ he said. He picked 
up the packages. ‘This is mosquito netting. This is a 
bottle of vermouth. You like vermouth? These are 
English papers.’ 

‘Please open them.’ 

He was pleased and undid them. I held the mosquito 
netting in my hands. The vermouth he held up for me 
to see and then put it on the floor beside the bed. I 
held up one of the sheaf of English papers. I could 
read the headlines by turning it so the half-light from 
the window was on it. It was The News of the World. 

‘The others are illustrated,’ he said. 

‘It will be a great happiness to read them. Where 
did you get them?’ 

‘I sent for them to Mestre. I will have more.’ 

‘You were very good to come, father. Will you drink 
a glass of vermouth?’ 


78 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'Thank you. You keep it. It’s for you.’ 

'No, drink a glass,’ 

'All right. I will bring you more then.’ 

The orderly brought the glasses and opened the bottle. 
He broke off the cork and the end had to be shoved down 
into the bottle. I could see the priest was disappointed 
but he said, 'That’s all right. It’s no matter.’ 

'Here’s to your health, father.’ 

‘To your better health.’ 

Afterward he held the glass in his hand and we looked 
at one another. Sometimes we talked and were good 
friends but to-night it was difficult. 

'What’s the matter, father? You seem very tired.’ 

'I am tired but I have no right to be.’ 

'It’s the heat.’ 

'No. This is only the spring. I feel very low.’ 

‘You have the war disgust.’ 

‘No. But I hate the war.’ 

'I don’t enjoy it,’ I said. He shook his head and looked 
out of the window. 

‘You do not mind it. You do not see it. You must 
forgive me. I know you are wounded.’ 

'That is an accident.’ 

‘Still even wounded you do not see it. I can tell. I do 
not see it myself, but I feel it a little.’ 

'When I was wounded we were talking about it. 
Passini was talking.’ 

The priest put down the glass. He was thinking about 
something else. 

T know them because I am like they are,’ he said. 

‘You are different, though.’ 

‘But really I am like they are.’ 

'The officers don’t see anything.’ 

79 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Some of them do. Some are very delicate and feel 
worse than any of us.’ 

‘They are mostly different.’ 

‘It is not education or money. It is something else. 
Even if they had education or money men like Passini 
would not wish to be officers. I would not be an officer.’ 

‘You rank as an officer. I am an officer.’ 

‘I am not really. You are not even an Italian. You 
are a foreigner. But you are nearer the officers than 
you are to the men.’ 

‘What is the difference?’ 

‘I cannot say it easily. There are people who would 
make war. In this country there are many like that. 
There are other people who would not make war.’ 

‘But the first ones make them do it.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And I help them.’ 

‘You are a foreigner. You are a patriot.’ 

‘ And the ones who would not make war? Can they 
stop it?’ 

‘I do not know.’ 

He looked out of the window again. I watched his face. 

‘Have they ever been able to stop it?’ 

‘They are not organized to stop things and when 
they get organized their leaders sell them out.’ 

‘Then it’s hopeless?’ 

‘It is never hopeless. But sometimes I cannot hope. 
I try always to hope, but sometimes I cannot.’ 

‘Maybe the war will be over.’ 

‘I hope so.’ 

‘What will you do then?’ 

‘If it is possible I will return to the Abruzzi.’ 

His brown face was suddenly very happy. 

8o 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'You love the Abruzzi!’ 

‘Yes, I love it very much.’ 

‘You ought to go there then.’ 

‘I would be too happy. If I could live there and love 
God and serve Him.’ 

‘And be respected,’ I said. 

‘Yes and be respected. Why not?’ 

‘No reason not. You should be respected.’ 

‘It does not matter. But there in my country it is under- 
stood that a man may love God. It is not a dirty joke.’ 

‘I understand,’ 

He looked at me and smiled. 

‘You understand, but you do not love God.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘You do not love Him at all?’ he asked. 

‘I am afraid of Him in the night sometimes.’ 

‘You should love Him.’ 

‘I don’t love much.’ 

‘Yes,’ he said. ‘You do. WTiat you tell me about 
in the nights. That is not love. That is only passion 
and lust. When you love you wish to do things for. 
You wish to sacrifice for. You wish to serve.’ 

‘I don’t love.’ 

‘You will. I know you will. Then you will be happy.’ 

‘I’m happy. I’ve always been happy.’ 

‘It is another thing. You cannot know about it unless 
you have it.’ 

‘Well,’ I said. ‘If I ever get it I will tell you.’ 

‘I stay too long and talk too much.’ He was worried 
that he really did. 

‘No. Don’t go. How about loving women? If I really 
loved some woman, would it be like that?’ 

‘I don’t know about that. I never loved any woman.’ 

F 8i 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘What about your mother?’ 

‘Yes, I must have loved my mother.’ 

‘Did you always love God?’ 

‘Ever since I was a little boy.’ 

‘Well,’ I said. I did not know what to say. ‘You are 
a fine boy,’ I said. 

‘I am a boy,’ he said. ‘But you call me father.’ 

‘That’s politeness.’ 

He smiled. 

‘I must go, really,’ he said. ‘You do not want me for 
anything?’ he asked hopefully. 

‘No. Just to talk.’ 

‘I will take your greetings to the mess.’ 

‘Thank you for the many fine presents.’ 

‘Nothing.’ 

‘Come and see me again.’ 

‘Yes. Good-bye,’ he patted my hand. 

‘So long,’ I said in dialect. 

‘Ciaou,’ he repeated. 

It was dark in the room and the orderly, who had sat 
by the foot of the bed, got up and went out with him. 
I liked him very much and I hoped he would get back 
to the Abruzzi some time. He had a rotten life in the 
mess and he was fine about it, but I thought how he 
would be in his own country. At Capracotta, he had 
told me, there were trout in the stream below the town. 
It was forbidden to play the flute at night. When the 
young men serenaded only the flute was forbidden. 
Why, I had asked. Because it was bad for the girls to 
hear the flute at night. The peasants all called you ‘Don’ 
and when you met them they took off their hats. His 
father hunted every day and stopped to eat at the houses 
of peasants. They were always honoured. For a foreigner 

82 



A FAREWELL TO AR:\IS 


to hunt he must present a certificate that he had never 
been arrested. There were bears on the Gran Sasso 
DTtalia, but it was a long way. Aquila was a fine town. 
It was cool in the summer at night and the spring in 
Abruzzi was the most beautiful in Italy. But what was 
lovely was the fall to go hunting through the chestnut 
woods. The birds were all good because they fed on 
grapes and you never took a lunch because the peasants 
were always honoured if you W'Ould eat with them at 
their houses. After a while I went to sleep. 


CHAPTER 13 


The room was long with window^s on the right-hand 
side and a door at the far end that w^ent into the dressing- 
room. The row of beds that mine was in faced the 
windows and another row, under the windows, faced 
the wall. If you lay on your left side you could see the 
dressing-room door. There was another door at the far 
end that people sometimes came in by. If anyone were 
going to die they put a screen around the bed so you 
could not see them die, but only the shoes and puttees 
of doctors and men nurses showed under the bottom of 
the screen and sometimes at the end there would be 
whispering. Then the priest would come out from 
behind the screen and afterward the men nurses w^ould 
go back behind the screen to come out again carrying the 
one who was dead with a blanket over him down the 
corridor between the beds and someone folded the 
screen and took it away. 


83 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

That morning the major in charge of the ward asked 
me if I felt that I could travel the next day. I said I 
could. He said then they would ship me out early in 
the morning. He said I would be better off making the 
trip now before it got too hot. 

When they lifted you up out of bed to carry you into 
the dressing-room you could look out of the window 
and see the new graves in the garden. A soldier sat out- 
side the door that opened on to the garden, making 
crosses and painting on them the names, rank, and regi- 
ment of the men who were buried in the garden. He 
also ran errands for the ward, and in his spare time made 
me a cigarette-lighter out of an empty Austrian rifle- 
cartridge. The doctors were very nice and seemed 
very capable. They were anxious to ship me to Milan, 
where there were better X-ray facilities and where, 
after the operation, I could take mechanico-therapy. I 
wanted to go to Milan too. They wanted to get us all 
out and back as far as possible because all the beds were 
needed for the offensive, when it should start. 

The night before I left the field hospital Rinaldi came 
in to see me with the major from our mess. They said 
that I would go to an American hospital in Milan that 
had just been installed. Some American ambulance 
units were to be sent down, and this hospital would look 
after them and any other Americans on service in Italy. 
There were many in the Red Cross. The States had 
declared war on Germany, but not on Austria. 

The Italians were sure America would declare war on 
Austria too, and they were very excited about any 
Americans coming down, even the Red Cross. They 
asked me if I thought President Wilson would declare 
war on Austria and I said it was only a matter of days. 

84 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I did not lonow what we had against Austria, but it 
seemed logical that they should declare war on her if 
they did on Germany. They asked me if we would 
declare war on Turkey. I said that was doubtful. Turkey, 
I said, w'as our national bird, but the joke translated 
so badly and they were so puzzled and suspicious that 
I said yes, w^e wmuld probably declare war on Turkey. 
And on Bulgaria? We had drunk several glasses of 
brandy and I said yes by God on Bulgaria too and on 
Japan. But, they said, Japan is an ally of England. 
You can’t trust the bloody English. The Japanese want 
Hawaii, I said. Where is Hawaii? It is in the Pacific 
Ocean. Why do the Japanese w^ant it? They don’t really 
w^ant it, I said. That is all talk. The Japanese are a 
w’onderful little people, fond of dancing and light wines. 
Like the French, said the major. We will get Nice and 
Savoia from the French. We will get Corsica and all 
the Adriatic coast-line, Rinaldi said. Italy will return 
to the splendours of Rome, said the major. I don’t like 
Rome, I said. It is hot and full of fleas. You don’t 
like Rome? Yes, I love Rome. Rome is the mother of 
nations. I will never forget Romulus suckling the Tiber. 
What? Nothing. Let’s all go to Rome. Let’s go to 
Rome to-night and never come back. Rome is a beautiful 
city, said the major. The mother and father of nations, 
I said. Roma is feminine, said Rinaldi. It cannot be 
the father. Who is the father, then, the Holy Ghost? 
Don’t blaspheme. I wasn’t blaspheming, I was asking 
for information. You are drunk, baby. Who made me 
drunk? I made you drunk, said the major. I made you 
drunk because I love you and because America is in the 
war. Up to the hilt, I said. You go away in the morning, 
baby, Rinaldi said. To Rome, I said. No, to Milan. 

85 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


To Milan, said the Major, to the Crystal Palace, to the 
Cova, to Campari’s, to Biffi’s, to the galleria. You lucky 
boy. To the Gran Italia, I said, where I will borrow 
money from George. To the Scala, said Rinaldi. You 
will go to the Scala. Every night, I said. You won’t be 
able to afford it every night, said the major. 

The tickets are very expensive. I will draw a sight 
draft on my grandfather, I said. A what? A sight draft. 
He has to pay or I go to jail. Mr. Cunningham at the 
bank does it. I live by sight drafts. Can a grandfather 
jail a patriotic grandson who is dying that Italy may 
live? Live the American Garibaldi, said Rinaldi. Ewiva 
the sight drafts, I said. We must be quiet, said the major. 
Already we have been asked many times to be quiet. 
Do you go to-morrow really, Federico? He goes to the 
American hospital, I tell you, Rinaldi said. To the 
beautiful nurses. Not the nurses with beards of the 
field hospital. Yes, yes, said the major, I know he goes 
to the American hospital. I don’t mind their beards, 
I said. If any man wants to raise a beard, let him. Why 
don’t you raise a beard. Signor Maggiore? It could not 
go in a gas-mask. Yes, it could. An3^hing can go in a 
gas-mask. I’ve vomited into a gas-mask. Don’t be so 
loud, baby, Rinaldi said. We all know you have been at 
the front. Oh, you fine baby, what will I do while you 
are gone? We must go, said the major. This becomes 
sentimental. Listen, I have a surprise for you. Your 
English. You know? The English you go to see every 
night at their hospital? She is going to Milan too. She 
goes with another to be at the American hospital. They 
had not got nurses yet from America. I talked to-day 
with the head of their riparto. They have too many 
women here at the front. They send some back. How 

86 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

do you like that, baby? All right. Yes? You go to live 
in a big city and have your English there to cuddle you. 
Why don't I get wounded? Maybe you will, I said. 
We must go, said the major. We drink and make noise 
and disturb Federico. Don’t go. Yes, we must go. 
Good-bye. Good luck. Many things. Ciaou. Ciaou. 
Ciaou. Come back quickly, baby. Rinaldi kissed me. 
You smell of lysol. Good-bye, baby. Good-bye. Many 
things. The major patted my shoulder. They tiptoed 
out. I found I was quite drunk, but went to sleep. 

The next day in the morning we left for Milan and 
arrived forty-eight hours later. It was a bad trip. We 
were side-tracked for a long time this side of Mestre and 
children came and peeked in. I got a little boy to go for 
a bottle of cognac, but he came back and said he could 
only get grappa. I told him to get it, and w^hen it came 
I gave him the change, and the man beside me and I got 
drunk and slept until past Vicenza, where I woke up and 
was very sick on the floor. It did not matter, because the 
man on that side had been very sick on the floor several 
times before. Afterward I thought I could not stand the 
thirst and in the yards outside of Verona I called to a 
soldier who v^as walking up and dowm beside the train 
and he got me a drink of water. I woke Georgetti, the 
other boy who was drunk, and offered him some water. 
He said to pour it on his shoulder and went back to 
sleep. The soldier would not take the penny I offered 
him and brought me a pulpy orange. I sucked on that 
and spat out the pith and watched the soldier pass up 
and down past a freight-car outside and after a while 
the train gave a jerk and started. 


87 




BOOK II 




CHAPTER 13 


We got into Milan early in the morning and they un- 
loaded us in the freight-yard. Aji ambulance took me to 
the American hospital. Riding in the ambulance on a 
stretcher I could not tell what part of the town w^e 
were passing through, but when they unloaded ^^the 
stretcher I saw a market-place and an open wine shop 
with a girl sweeping out. They were watering the street 
and it smelled of the early morning. They put the 
stretcher down and went in. The porter came out with 
them. He had grey moustaches, wore a doorman’s cap 
and was in his shirt-sleeves. The stretcher would not go 
into the elevator and they discussed w^hether it was 
better to lift me oif the stretcher and go up in the elevator 
or carry the stretcher up the stairs. I listened to them 
discussing it. They decided on the elevator. They lifted 
me from the stretcher. ‘Go easy/ I said. ‘Take it softly.’ 

In the elevator we were crow^ded and as my legs bent 
the pain was very bad. ‘Straighten out the legs,’ I 
said. 

‘We can’t, Signor Tenente. There isn’t room.’ The 
man who said this had his arm around me and my arm 
was around his neck. His breath came in my face metallic 
with garlic and red wine. 

‘Be gentle,’ the other man said. 

‘Son of a bitch who isn’t gentle.’ 

‘Be gentle, I say,’ the man with my feet repeated. 

1 saw the doors of the elevator closed, and the grille 

91 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

shut and the fourth-floor button pushed by the porter. 
The porter looked worried. The elevator rose slowly. 

‘Heavy?’ I asked the man with the garlic. 

‘Nothing,’ he said. His face was sweating and he 
grunted. The elevator rose steadily and stopped. The 
man holding the feet opened the door and stepped out. 
We were on a balcony. There were several doors with 
brass knobs. The man carrying the feet pushed a button 
that rang a bell. We heard it inside the doors. No one 
came. Then the porter came up the stairs. 

‘Where are they?’ the stretcher-bearers asked. 

T don’t know,’ said the porter, ‘They sleep downstairs.’ 

‘Get somebody.’ 

The porter rang the bell, then knocked on the door, 
then he opened the door and went in. When he came 
back there was an elderly woman wearing glasses with 
him. Her hair was loose and half-falling, and she wore a 
nurse’s dress. 

T can’t understand,’ she said. T can’t understand 
Italian.’ 

T can speak English,’ I said. ‘They want to put me 
somewhere.’ 

‘None of the rooms are ready. There isn’t any patient 
expected.’ She tucked at her hair and looked at me near- 
sightedly. 

‘Show them any room where they can put me.’ 

‘I don’t know,’ she said. ‘There’s no patient expected. 
I couldn’t put you in just any room.’ 

‘Any room will do,’ I said. Then to the porter in 
Italian, ‘Find an empty room.’ 

‘They are all empty,’ said the porter. ‘You are the 
first patient.’ He held his cap in his hand and looked at 
the elderly nurse. 


92 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘For Christ’s sweet sake take me to some room.’ The 
pain had gone on and on with the legs bent, and I could 
feel it going in and out of the bone. The porter went 
in the door, followed by the grey-haired woman, then 
came hurrying back. ‘Follow me,’ he said. They carried 
me down a long hallway and into a room with drawn 
blinds. It smelled of new furniture. There was a bed 
and a big wardrobe with a mirror. They laid me down 
on the bed. 

T can’t put on sheets,’ the wmman said. ‘The sheets 
are locked up.’ 

I did not speak to her. ‘There is money in my pocket,’ 
I said to the porter. ‘In the buttoned-down pocket.’ 
The porter took out the money. The two stretcher-bearers 
stood beside the bed holding their caps. ‘Give them 
five lire apiece and five lire for yourself. My papers 
are in the other pocket. You may give them to the nurse.’ 

The stretcher-bearers saluted and said thank you. 
‘Good-bye,’ I said. ‘And many thanks.’ They saluted 
again and went out. 

‘Those papers,’ I said to the nurse, ‘describe my case 
and the treatment already given.’ 

The woman picked them up and looked at them 
through her glasses. There were three papers and they 
were folded. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she said. ‘I 
can’t read Italian. I can’t do anything without the 
doctor’s orders.’ She commenced to cry and put the 
papers in her apron pocket. ‘Are you an American?’ she 
asked crying. 

‘Yes. Please put the papers on the table by the bed.’ 

It was dim and cool in the room. As I lay on the 
bed I could see the big mirror on the other side of the 
room, but could not see what it reflected. The porter 

93 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


stood by the bed. He had a nice face and was very 
kind. 

‘You can go,’ I said to him. ‘You can go too,’ I said 
to the nurse. ‘What is your name?’ 

‘Mrs. Walker.’ 

‘You can go, Mrs. Walker. I think I will go to sleep.’ 

I was alone in the room. It was cool and did not smell 
like a hospital. The mattress was firm and comfortable, 
and I lay without moving, hardly breathing, happy in 
feeling the pain lessen. After a while I wanted a drink 
of water and found the bell on a cord by the bed and 
rang it, but nobody came. I went to sleep. 

When I woke I looked around. There was sunlight 
coming in through the shutters. I saw the big armoire, 
the bare walls, and two chairs. My legs in the dirty 
bandages stuck straight out in the bed. I was careful not 
to move them. I was thirsty and I reached for the bell 
and pushed the button. I heard the door open and looked 
and it was a nurse. She looked young and pretty. 

‘Good morning,’ I said. 

‘Good morning,’ she said and came over to the bed. 
‘We haven’t been able to get the doctor. He’s gone to 
Lake Como. No one knew there was a patient coming. 
What’s wrong with you, anyway?’ 

‘I’m wounded. In the legs and feet and my head is 
hurt.’ 

‘What’s your name?’ 

‘Henry. Frederic Henry.’ 

‘I’ll wash you up. But we can’t do anything to the 
dressings until the doctor comes.’ 

‘Is Miss Barkley here?’ 

‘No. There’s no one by that name here.’ 

‘Who was the woman who cried when I came in?’ 

94 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


The nurse laughed. ‘That’s Airs. W'alker. She was 
on night-duty and she’d been asleep. She wasn’t expecting 
anyone.’ 

'While we were talking she was undressing me^ and 
when I was undressed, except for the bandages, she 
washed me, very gently and smoothly. The washing 
felt very good. There was a bandage on my head, but 
she w^ashed all around the edge. 

‘Where w’ere you wounded?’ 

‘On the Isonzo, north of Plava.’ 

‘Where is that?’ 

‘North of Gorizia.’ 

I could see that none of the places meant anything 
to her. 

‘Do you have a lot of pain?’ 

‘No. Not much now.’ 

She put a thermometer in my mouth. 

‘The Italians put it under the arm,’ I said. 

‘Don’t talk.’ 

When she took the thermometer out she read it and 
then shook it. 

‘What’s the temperature?’ 

‘You’re not supposed to know^ that.’ 

‘Tell me what it is.’ 

‘It’s almost normal.’ 

‘I never have any fever. My legs are full of old iron 
too.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘They’re full of trench-mortar fragments, old screws 
and bed-springs and things.’ 

She shook her head and smiled. 

‘If you had any foreign bodies in your legs they would 
set up an inflammation and you’d have fever.’ 

95 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

^Ali right/ I said. 'Well see what comes out.’ 

She went out of the room and came back with the 
old nurse of the early morning. Together they made the 
bed with me in it. That was new to me and an admirable 
proceeding. 

‘Who is in charge here?’ 

‘Miss Van Campen.’ 

‘How many nurses are there?’ 

‘Just us two.’ 

‘Won’t there be more?’ 

‘Some more are coming.’ 

‘When will they get here?’ 

‘I don’t know. You ask a great many questions for a 
sick boy.’ 

‘I’m not sick,’ I said, ‘I’m wounded.’ 

They had finished making the bed and I lay with a 
clean smooth sheet under me and another sheet over 
me. Mrs. Walker went out and came back with a pyjama 
jacket. They put that on me and I felt very clean and 
dressed. 

‘You’re awfully nice to me,’ I said. The nurse called 
Miss Gage giggled. ‘Could I have a drink of water?’ I 
asked. 

‘Certainly, Then you can have breakfast.’ 

‘I don’t want breakfast. Can I have the shutters 
opened, please?’ 

The light had been dim in the room and when the 
shutters were opened it was bright sunlight and I looked 
out on a balcony and beyond were the tiled roofs of houses 
and chimneys. I looked out over the tiled roofs and saw 
white clouds and the sky very blue. 

‘Don’t you know when the other nurses are coming?’ 

‘Why? Don’t we take good care of you?’ 

96 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘You’re very nice.’ 

‘Would you like to use the bedpan?’ 

‘I might trj-.’ 

They helped me and held me up, but it was not any 
use. Afterward I lay and looked out the open doors on to 
the balcony. 

‘When does the doctor come?’ 

‘When he gets back. We’ve tried to telephone to 
Lake Como for him.’ 

‘Aren’t there any other doctors?’ 

‘He’s the doctor for the hospital.’ 

Miss Gage brought a pitcher of water and a glass. I 
drank three glasses and then they left me and I looked 
out the window a while and went back to sleep. I ate 
some lunch and in the afternoon Miss Van Campen, 
the superintendent, came up to see me. She did not 
like me and I did not like her. She was small and neatly 
suspicious and too good for her position. She asked 
many questions and seemed to think it was somewhat 
disgraceful that I was with the Italians. 

‘Can I have wine with the meals?’ I asked her. 

‘Only if the doctor prescribes it.’ 

‘I can’t have it until he comes?’ 

‘Absolutely not.’ 

‘You plan on having him come eventually?’ 

‘We’ve telephoned him at Lake Como.’ 

She went out and Miss Gage came back. 

‘Why were you rude to Miss Van Campen?’ she asked 
after she had done something for me very skilfully. 

‘I didn’t mean to be. But she was snooty.’ 

‘She said you were domineering and rude.’ 

‘I wasn’t. But what’s the idea of a hospital without a 
doctor?’ 

G 97 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘He’s coming. They’ve telephoned for him to Lake 
Como.’ 

‘What does he do there? Swim?’ 

‘No. He has a clinic there.’ 

‘Why don’t they get another doctor?’ 

‘Hush! Hush! Be a good boy and he’ll come.’ 

I sent for the porter and when he came I told him in 
Italian to get me a bottle of Cinzano at the wine shop, 
a fiasco of chianti and the evening papers. He went 
away and brought them wrapped in newspaper, un- 
wrapped them, and then I asked him to draw the corks 
and put the wine and vermouth under the bed. They 
left me alone and I lay in bed and read the papers a while, 
the news from the front, and the list of dead officers 
with their decorations and then reached down and 
brought up the bottle of Cinzano and held it straight 
up on my stomach, the cool glass against my stomach, 
and took little drinks, making rings on my stomach 
from holding the bottle there between drinks, and 
watched it get dark outside over the roofs of the town. 
The swallows circled around and I watched them and 
the night hawks flying above the roofs and drank the 
Cinzano. Miss Gage brought up a glass with some egg 
nog in it. I lowered the vermouth bottle to the other 
side of the bed when she came in. 

‘Miss Van Campen had some sherry put in this,’ 
she said. ‘You shouldn’t be rude to her. She’s not 
young and this hospital is a big responsibility for her. 
Mrs. Walker’s too old and she’s no use to her.’ 

She s a splendid woman,’ I said. ‘Thank her very 
much.’ 

I m going to bring your supper right away.’ 

That s all right,’ I said. ‘I’m not hungry.’ 

98 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


WThen she brought the tray and put it on the bed- 
table I thanked her and ate a little of the supper. After- 
ward it was dark outside and I could see the beams of 
the searchlights moving in the sky. I watched for a 
while and then went to sleep. I slept heavily, except 
once I woke sweating and scared and then went back 
to sleep, trying to stay outside of my dream. I woke 
for good long before it was light and heard roosters 
crowing, and stayed on awake until it began to be light. 
I was tired and once it was really light I went back to 
sleep again. 


CHAPTER 14 


It was bright sunlight in the room when I woke. I 
thought I was back at the front and stretched out in 
bed. My legs hurt me and I looked down at them, still 
in the dirty bandages, and seeing them knew where I 
w’as. I reached up for the bell-cord and pushed the 
button. I heard it buzz down the hall and then some- 
one coming on rubber soles along the hall. It was Miss 
Gage and she looked a little older in the bright sunlight 
and not so pretty. 

‘Good morning,’ she said. ‘Did you have a good 
night?’ 

‘Yes, thanks, very much,’ I said. ‘Can I have a 
barber?’ 

‘I came in to see you and you were asleep with this 
in the bed with you.’ 

She opened the armoire door and held up the ver- 
mouth bottle. It was nearly empty. ‘I put the other 

99 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

bottle from under the bed in there too,’ she said. ‘Why 
didn’t you ask me for a glass?’ 

‘I thought maybe you wouldn’t let me have it.’ 

‘I’d have had some with you.’ 

‘You’re a fine girl.’ 

‘It isn’t good for you to drink alone,’ she said. ‘You 
mustn’t do it.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Your friend Miss Barkley’s come,’ she said. 

‘Really?’ 

‘Yes. I don’t like her.’ 

‘You will like her. She’s awfully nice.’ 

She shook her head. ‘I’m sure she’s fine. Can you 
move just a little to this side? That’s fine. I’ll clean 
you up for breakfast.’ She washed me with a cloth and 
soap and warm water. ‘Hold your shoulder up,’ she said 
‘That’s fine.’ 

‘Can I have the barber before breakfast?’ 

‘I’ll send the porter for him.’ She went out and came 
back. ‘He’s gone for him,’ she said and dipped the 
cloth she held in the basin of water. 

The barber came with the porter. He was a man of 
about fifty, with an upturned moustache. Miss Gage 
was finished with me and went out, and the barber 
lathered my face and shaved. He was very solemn and 
refrained from talking. ' 

‘What’s the matter? Don’t you know any news?’ I asked. 

‘What news?’ 

‘Any news. What’s happened in the town?’ 

It is time of war,’ he said. ‘The enemy’s ears are 
everywhere.’ 

I looked up at him. ‘Please hold your face still,’ he 
said and went on shaving. ‘I will tell nothing.’ 

lOO 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'What's the matter with you?’ I asked. 

T am an Italian. I will not communicate with the 
enemy.’ 

I let it go at that. If he was crazy, the sooner I could 
get out from under the razor the better. Once I tried 
to get a good look at him, 'Beware,’ he said. 'The razor 
is sharp.’ 

I paid him when it was over and tipped him half a lira. 
He returned the coins. 

T will not. I am not at the front. But I am an Italian.’ 

'Get to hell out of here.’ 

'With your permission,’ he said and wrapped his 
razors in newspaper. He went out, leaving the five 
copper coins on the table beside the bed. I rang the 
bell. Miss Gage came in. ‘Would you ask the porter 
to come, please?’ 

'All right.’ 

The porter came in. He was trying to keep from 
laughing. 

‘Is that barber crazy?’ 

‘No, signorino. He made a mistake. He doesn’t 
understand very well and he thought I said you were 
an Austrian officer.’ 

‘Oh,’ I said. 

'Ho, ho, ho!’ the porter laughed. 'He was funny. 
One move from you, he said, and he would have - ’ He 
drew his forefinger across his throat. 

'Ho, ho, ho!’ He tried to keep from laughing. 'When 
I tell him you were not an Austrian. Ho, ho, ho!’ 

'Ho, ho, ho!’ I said bitterly. 'How funny if he would 
cut my throat. Ho, ho, ho!’ 

'No, signorino. No, no. He was so frightened of an 
Austrian. Ho, ho, ho.’ 


lOI 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Ho, ho, ho!’ I said. ‘Get out of here!’ 

He went out and I heard him laughing in the hall. 
I heard someone coming down the hallway. I looked 
toward the door. It was Catherine Barkley. 

She came in the room and over to the bed. 

‘Hello, darling,’ she said. She looked fresh and young 
and very beautiful. I thought I had never seen anyone 
so beautiful. 

‘Hello,’ I said. When I saw her I was in love with 
her. Everything turned over inside of me. She looked 
toward the door, saw there was no one, then she sat on 
the side of the bed and leaned over and kissed me. I 
pulled her down and kissed her and felt her heart beating. 

‘You sweet,’ I said. ‘Weren’t you wonderful to come 
here?’ 

‘It wasn’t very hard. It may be hard to stay.’ 

‘You’ve got to stay,’ I said. ‘Oh, you’re wonderful.’ 
I was crazy about her. I could not believe she was really 
there and held her tight to me. 

‘You mustn’t,’ she said. ‘You’re not well enough.’ 

‘Yes. I am. Come on.’ 

‘No. You’re not strong enough.’ 

‘Yes. I am. Yes. Please.’ 

‘You do love me?’ 

‘I really love you. I’m crazy about you. Come on, 
please.’ 

‘Feel our hearts beating?’ 

‘I don’t care about our hearts. I want you. I’m just 
mad about you.’ 

‘You really love me?’ 

Don t keep on saying that. Come on. Please, please, 
Catherine.’ 


102 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘All right, but only for a minute.’ 

‘All right,’ I said. ‘Shut the door.’ 

‘You can’t. You shouldn’t-’ 

‘Come on. Don’t talk. Please come on.’ 

Catherine sat in a chair by the bed. The door was 
open into the hall. The wildness was gone and I felt 
finer than I had ever felt. 

She asked, ‘Now do you believe I love you?’ 

‘Oh, you’re lovely,’ I said. ‘You’ve got to stay. They 
can’t send you away. I’m crazy in love with you.’ 

‘We’ll have to be awfully careful. That was just mad- 
ness. We can’t do that.’ 

‘We can at night.’ 

‘W’e’ll have to be awfully careful. You’ll have to be 
careful in front of other people.’ 

‘I will.’ 

‘You’ll have to be. You’re sweet. You do love me, 
don’t you?’ 

‘Don’t say that again. You don’t know what that 
does to me.’ 

T’ll be careful then. I don’t want to do anything 
more to you. I have to go now, darling, really.’ 

‘Come back right away.’ 

‘I’ll come when I can.’ 

‘Good-bye.’ 

‘Good-bye, sweet.’ 

She went out. God knows I had not wanted to fall 
in love vifith her. I had not wanted to fall in love with 
anyone. But God knows I had and I lay on the bed 
in the room of the hospital in Milan and all sorts of 
things went through my head and finally Miss Gage 
came in. 

103 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘The doctor’s coming,’ she said. ‘He telephoned 
from Lake Como.’ 

‘When does he get here?’ 

‘He’ll be here this afternoon.’ 


CHAPTER 15 

Nothing happened until afternoon. The doctor was 
a thin quiet little man who seemed disturbed by the 
war. He took out a number of small steel splinters 
from my thighs with delicate and refined distaste. He 
used a local anaesthetic called something or other ‘snow,’ 
which froze the tissue and avoided pain until the probe, 
the scalpel or the forceps got below the frozen portion. 
The anaesthetized area was clearly defined by the patient, 
and after a time the doctor’s fragile delicacy was ex- 
hausted and he said it would be better to have an X-ray, 
Probing was unsatisfactory, he said. 

The X-ray was taken at the Ospedale Maggiore, and 
the doctor who did it was excitable, efficient and cheerful. 
It was arranged by holding up the shoulders, that the 
patient should see personally some of the larger foreign 
bodies through the machine. The plates were to be 
sent over. The doctor requested me to write in his 
pocket notebook, my name, and regiment and some 
sentiment. He declared that the foreign bodies were 
ugly, nasty, brutal. The Austrians were sons of bitches. 
How many had I killed? I had not killed any, but I 
w^ anxious to please -and I said I had killed plenty. 
Miss Gage was with me and the doctor put his arm 

104 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

around her and said she was more beautiful than Cleo- 
patra, Did she understand that? Cleopatra the former 
queen of Egypt. Yes, by God she was. We returned 
to the little hospital in the ambulance, and after a while 
and much lifting I was upstairs and in bed again. The 
plates came that afternoon, the doctor had said by God 
he would have them that afternoon and he did. Catherine 
Barkley showed them to me. They were in red envelopes 
and she took them out of the envelopes and held them 
up to the light and we both looked. 

‘That’s your right leg,’ she said, then put the plate 
back in the envelope. ‘This is your left.’ 

Tut them away,’ I said, ‘and come over to the bed.’ 

T can’t,’ she said. ‘I just brought them in for a second 
to show you.’ 

She went out and I lay there. It was a hot after- 
noon and I was sick of lying in bed. I sent the porter 
for the papers, all the papers he could get. 

Before he came back three doctors came into the 
room. I have noticed that doctors who fail in the prac- 
tice of medicine have a tendency to seek one another’s 
company and aid in consultation. A doctor who cannot 
take out your appendix properly will recommend to 
you a doctor who will be unable to remove your tonsils 
with success. These were three such doctors. 

‘This is the young man,’ said the house doctor with 
the delicate hands. 

‘How do you do?’ said the tall gaunt doctor with 
the beard. The third doctor, who carried the X-ray 
plates in their red envelopes, said nothing. 

‘Remove the dressings?’ questioned the bearded 
doctor. 

‘Certainly. Remove the dressings, please, nurse,’ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

the house doctor said to Miss Gage. Miss Gage re- 
moved the dressings. I looked down at the legs. At 
the field hospital they had the look of not too freshly 
ground hamburger steak. Now they were crusted and 
the knee was swollen and discoloured, and the calf 
sunken, but there was no pus. 

‘Very clean,’ said the house doctor. ‘Very clean and 
nice.’ 

‘Um,’ said the doctor with the beard. The third 
doctor looked over the house doctor’s shoulder. 

‘Please move the knee,’ said the bearded doctor. 

‘I can’t.’ 

‘Test the articulation?’ the bearded doctor questioned. 
He had a stripe beside the three stars on his sleeve. 
That meant he was a first captain. 

‘Certainly,’ the house doctor said. Two of them 
took hold of my right leg very gingerly and bent it. 

‘That hurts,’ I said. 

‘Yes, yes. A little further, doctor.’ 

‘That’s enough. That’s as far as it goes,’ I said. 

‘Partial articulation,’ said the first captain. He straight- 
ened up. ‘May I see the plates again, please, doctor?’ 
The third doctor handed him one of the plates. ‘No. 
The left leg, please.’ 

‘That is the left leg, doctor.’ 

‘You are right. I was looking from a different angle.’ 
He returned the plate. The other plate he examined for 
some time. ‘You see, doctor?’ he pointed to one of the 
foreign bodies which showed spherical and clear against 
the light. They examined the plate for some time. 

‘Only one thing I can say,’ the first captain with the 
beard said. ‘It is a question of time. Three months, 
six months probably.’ 

io6 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Certainly the synoveal fluid must re-form.’ 

‘Certainly. It is a question of time. I could not con- 
scientiously open a knee like that before the projectile 
was encysted.’ 

‘I agree with you, doctor.’ 

‘Six months for what?’ I asked. 

‘Six months for the projectile to encyst before the 
knee can be opened safely.* 

‘I don’t believe it,’ I said. 

‘Do you want to keep your knee, young man?’ 

‘No,’ I said. 

‘What?’ 

‘I want it cut off,’ I said, ‘so I can wear a hook on it.’ 

‘What do you mean? A hook?’ 

‘He is joking,’ said the house doctor. He patted my 
shoulder very delicately. ‘He wants to keep his knee. 
This is a very brave young man. He has been proposed 
for the silver medal of valour.’ 

‘All my felicitations,’ said the first captain. He shook 
my hand. ‘I can only say that to be on the safe side 
you should wait at least six months before opening 
such a knee. You are welcome of course to another 
opinion.’ 

‘Thank you very much,’ I said. ‘I value your opinion.’ 

The first captain looked at his watch. 

‘We must go,’ he said. ‘All my best wishes.’ 

‘All my best wishes and many thanks,’ I said. I shook 
hands with the third doctor, Capitan Varini-Tenente 
Enrj’', and they all three went out of the room. 

‘Miss Gage,’ I called. She came in. ‘Please ask the 
house doctor to come back a minute.’ 

He came in holding his cap and stood by the bed. 
‘Did you wish to see me?’ 

107 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Yes. I can’t wait six months to be operated on. 
My God, doctor, did you ever stay in bed six months?’ 

‘You won’t be in bed all the time. You must first 
have the wounds exposed to the sun. Then afterward 
you can be on crutches.’ 

‘For six months and then have an operation?’ 

‘That is the safe way. The foreign bodies must be 
allowed to encyst and the synoveal fluid will re-form. 
Then it will be safe to open up the knee.’ 

‘Do you really think yourself I will have to wait that 
long?’ 

‘That is the safe way.’ 

‘Who is that first captain?’ 

‘He is a very excellent surgeon of Milan.’ 

‘He’s a first captain, isn’t he?’ 

‘Yes, but he is an excellent surgeon.’ 

‘I don’t want my leg fooled with by a first captain. 
If he was any good he would be made a major. I know 
what a first captain is, doctor.’ 

‘He is an excellent surgeon and I would rather have 
his judgment than any surgeon I know.’ 

‘Could another surgeon see it?’ 

‘Certainly, if you wish. But I would take Dr. Barella’s 
opinion myself.’ 

‘Could you ask another surgeon to come and see it?’ 

‘I will ask Valentini to come.’ 

‘Who is he?’ 

‘He is a surgeon of the Ospedale Maggiore.’ 

‘Good. I appreciate it very much. You understand, 
doctor, I couldn’t stay in bed six months.’ 

You would not be in bed. You would first take a 
sun cure. Then you could have light exercise. Then 
when it was encysted we would operate.’ 

io8 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘But I can’t wait six months.’ 

The doctor spread his delicate fingers on the cap he 
held and smiled. ‘You are in such a hurry to get back 
to the front?’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘It is very beautiful,’ he said. ‘You are a noble young 
man.’ He stooped over and kissed me very delicately on 
the forehead. ‘I will send for Valentini. Do not worry 
and excite yourself. Be a good boy.’ 

‘Will you have a drink?’ I asked. 

‘No thank you. I never drink alcohol.’ 

‘Just have one.’ I rang for the porter to bring glasses. 

‘No. No thank you. They are waiting for me.’ 

‘Good-bye,’ I said. 

‘Good-bye.’ 

Two hours later Dr. Valentini came into the room. 
He was in a great hurry and the points of his moustache 
stood straight up. He was a major, his face was tanned 
and he laughed all the time. 

‘How did you do it, this rotten thing?’ he asked. 
‘Let me see the plates. Yes. Yes. That’s it. You look 
healthy as a goat. Who’s the pretty girl? Is she your 
girl? I thought [so. Isn’t this a bloody war? How 
does that feel? You are a fine boy. I’ll make you 
better than new. Does that hurt? You bet it hurts. 
How they love to hurt you, these doctors. What have 
they done for you so far? Can’t that girl talk Italian? 
She should learn. What a lovely girl. I could teach 
her. I will be a patient here myself. No, but I will do 
all your maternity work free. Does she understand 
that? She will make you a fine boy. A fine blonde like 
she is. That’s fine. That’s all right. What a lovely 

109 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


girl. Ask her if she eats supper with me. No, I don’t 
take her away from you. Thank you. Thank you very 
much, miss. That’s all.’ 

‘That’s all I want to know.’ He patted me on the 
shoulder. ‘Leave the dressings off.’ 

‘Will you have a drink. Dr. Valentini?’ 

‘A drink? Certainly. I will have ten drinks. Where 
are they?’ 

‘In the armoire. Miss Barkley will get the bottle.’ 

‘Cheery oh. Cheery oh to you, miss. What a lovely 
girl. I -ivill bring you better cognac than that.’ He wiped 
his moustache. 

‘When do you think it can be operated on?’ 

‘To-morrow morning. Not before. Your stomach 
must be emptied. You must be washed out. I will see 
the old lady downstairs and leave instructions. Good- 
bye. I see you to-morrow. I’ll bring you better cognac 
than that. You are very comfortable here. Good-bye. 
Until to-morrow. Get a good sleep. I’ll see you early.’ 
He waved from the doorway, his moustaches went 
straight up, his brown face was smiling. There was a 
star in a box on his sleeve because he was a major. 


CHAPTER i6 


That night a bat flew into the room through the open 
door that led on to the balcony and through which 
we watched the night over the roofs of the town. It 
was dark in our room except for the small light of the 
night over the town and the bat was not frightened, but 

no 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


hunted in the room as though he had been outside. We 
lay and watched him and I do not think he saw us^ 
because we lay so still. After he went out we saw a search- 
light come on and watched the beam move across the 
sky and then go off and it was dark again. A breeze 
came in the night and we heard the men of the anti- 
aircraft gun on the next roof talking. It was cool and 
they were putting on their capes. I worried in the night 
about someone coming up, but Catherine said they 
were all asleep. Once in the night we went to sleep 
and when I woke she was not there, but I heard her 
coming along the hall and the door opened and she 
came back to the bed and said it was all right she had 
been downstairs and they were all asleep. She had 
been outside Miss Van Campen’s door and heard her 
breathing in her sleep. She brought crackers and we 
ate them and drank some vermouth. We w^ere very 
hungry, but she said that would all have to be gotten 
out of me in the morning. I went to sleep again in the 
morning when it was light and when I was awake I 
found she was gone again. She came in looldng fresh 
and lovely and sat on the bed, and the sun rose while I 
had the thermometer in my mouth, and we smelled the 
dew on the roofs and then the coffee of the men at the 
gun on the next roof. 

‘I wish we could go for a walk,’ Catherine said. ‘I’d 
wheel you if we had a chair.’ 

‘How would I get into the chair?’ 

‘We’d do it.’ 

‘We could go out to the park and have breakfast out- 
doors.’ I looked out the open doorway. 

‘What we’ll really do,’ she said, ‘is get you ready for 
your friend, Dr. Valentini.’ 


Ill 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T thought he was grand.’ 

T didn’t like him as much as you did. But I imagine 
he’s very good.’ 

‘Come back to bed, Catherine, please,’ I said. 

‘I can’t. Didn’t we have a lovely night?’ 

‘And can you be on night-duty to-night?’ 

‘I probably will. But you won’t want me.’ 

‘Yes, I ■will.’ 

‘No, you won’t. You’ve never been operated on. You 
don’t know how you’ll be.’ 

‘I’ll be all right.’ 

‘You’ll be sick and I won’t be anything to you.’ 

‘Come back then now.’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘I have to do the chart, darling, and 
fix you up.’ 

‘You don’t really love me or you’d come back again.’ 

‘You’re such a silly boy.’ She kissed me. ‘That’s 
all right for the chart. Your temperature’s always normal. 
You’ve such a lovely temperature.’ 

‘You’ve got a lovely ever5^hing.’ 

‘Oh, no. You have the lovely temperature. I’m awfully 
proud of your temperature.’ 

‘Maybe all our children will have fine temperatures.’ 

‘Our children will probably have beastly tempera- 
tures.’ 

‘What do you have to do to get me ready for Valentini?’ 

‘Not much. But quite unpleasant.’ 

‘I wish you didn’t have to do it.’ 

‘I don’t. I don’t want anyone else to touch you. I’m 
silly. I get furious if they touch you.’ 

‘Even Ferguson?’ 

‘Especially Ferguson and Gage and the other, what’s 
her name?’ 


1 13 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Walker?’ 

‘That’s it. They’ve too many nurses here now. There 
must be some more patients or they’ll send us awav. 
They have four nurses now.’ 

‘Perhaps there’ll be some. They need that many 
nurses. It’s quite a big hospital.’ 

‘I hope some will come. What would I do if they 
sent me away? They will unless there are more patients.’ 

‘I’d go too.’ 

‘Don’t be silly. You can’t go yet. But get well quickly, 
darling, and we will go somewhere.’ 

‘And then what?’ 

‘Maybe the war will be over. It can’t always go on.’ 

‘I’ll get well,’ I said. ‘Valentini will fix me.’ 

‘He should with those moustaches. And, darling, 
when you’re going under the ether, just think about 
something else - not us. Because people get very blabby 
under an anaesthetic.’ 

‘What should I think about?’ 

‘An3rthing. Anything but us. Think about your 
people. Or even any other girl.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Say your prayers then. That ought to create a splendid 
impression.’ 

‘Maybe I w'on’t talk.’ 

‘That’s true. Often people don’t talk.’ 

‘I won’t talk.’ 

‘Don’t brag, darling. Please don’t brag. You’re so 
sweet and you don’t have to brag.’ 

‘I won’t talk a word.’ 

‘Now you’re bragging, darling. You know you don’t 
need to brag. Just start your prayers or poetry or some- 
thing when they tell you to breathe deeply. You’ll 
H 113 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

be lovely that way and I’ll be so proud of you. I’m 
very proud of you anyway. You have such a lovely 
temperature and you sleep like a little boy with your 
arm around the pillow and think it’s me. Or is it some 
other girl ? Some fine Italian girl?’ 

‘It’s you.’ 

‘Of course it’s me. Oh, I do love you, and Valen- 
tini will make you a fine leg. I’m glad I don’t have to 
watch it.’ 

‘And you’ll be on night-duty to-night.’ 

‘Yes. But you won’t care.’ 

‘You wait and see.’ 

‘There, darling. Now you’re all clean inside and 
out. Tell me. How many people have you ever loved?’ 

‘Nobody.’ 

‘Not even me?’ 

‘Yes, you.’ 

‘How many others really?’ 

‘None.’ 

‘How many have you - how do you say it? - stayed with?’ 

‘None.’ 

‘You’re lying to me.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘It’s all right. Keep right on lying to me. That’s 
what I want you to do. Were they pretty?’ 

‘I never stayed with anyone.’ 

‘That’s right. Were they very attractive?’ 

‘I don’t know anything about it.’ 

You re just mine. That’s true and you’ve never 
belonged to anyone else. But I don’t care if you have. 
I’m not afraid of them. But don’t tell me about them. 
When a man stays with a girl when does she say how 
much it costs?’ 


114 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T don’t know/ 

‘Of course not. Does she say she loves him? Tell 
me that. I want to know that.’ 

‘Yes. If he wants her to.’ 

‘Does he say he loves her? Tell me, please. It’s im- 
portant,’ 

‘He does if he wants to.’ 

‘But you never did? Really?’ 

‘No/ 

‘Not really. Tell me the truth?’ 

‘No,’ I lied. 

‘You wouldn’t,’ she said. T knew you wouldn’t. Oh, 
I love you, darling.’ 

Outside the sun was up over the roofs and I could 
see the points of the cathedral with the sunlight on 
them. I was clean inside and outside and waiting for 
the doctor. 

‘And that’s it?’ Catherine said. ‘She says just what 
he wants her to?’ 

‘Not always.’ 

‘But I will. I’ll say just what you wish and I’ll do 
what you wish and then you will never want any other 
girls, will you?’ She looked at me very happily. ‘I’ll 
do what you want and say what you want and then I’ll 
be a great success, won’t I?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘What would you like me to do now that you’re all ready?’ 

‘Come to the bed again.’ 

‘All right. I’ll come.’ 

‘Oh, darling, darling, darling,’ I said. 

‘You see,’ she said. ‘I do anything you want.’ 

‘You’re so lovely.’ 

T’m afraid I’m not very good at it yet,’ 

115 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘You’re lovely.’ 

‘I want what you want. There isn’t any me any more. 
Just what you want.’ 

‘You sweet.’ 

‘I’m good. Aren’t I good? You don’t want any other 
girls, do you?’ 

‘No.’ ' 

‘You see? I’m good. I do what you want.’ 


CHAPTER 17 

Whex I was awake after the operation I had not been 
away. You do not go away. They only choke you. 
It is not like dying, it is just a chemical choking, so 
you do not feel, and aftervi'-ard you might as well have 
been drunk except that when you throw up nothing 
comes but bile and you do not feel better afterward. 
I saw sandbags at the end of the bed. They were on 
pipes that came out of the cast. After a while I saw 
Miss Gage and she said, ‘How is it now?’ 

‘Better,’ I said. 

‘He did a wonderful job on your knee.’ 

‘How long did it take?’ 

‘Two hours and a half.’ 

‘Did I say anything silly?’ 

‘Not a thing. Don’t talk. Just be quiet.’ 

I was sick and Catherine was right. It did not make 
any diiference who was on night-duty. 

There were three other patients in the hospital now, 

116 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

a thin boy in the Red Cross from Georgia with malaria^ 
a nice boy, also thin, from New York, with malaria 
and jaundice, and a fine boy who had tried to unscrew 
the fuse-cap from a combination shrapnel and high 
explosive shell for a souvenir. This was a shrapnel shell 
used by the Austrians in the mountains with a nose-cap 
which went on after the burst and exploded on contact. 

Catherine Barkley was greatly liked by the nurses 
because she would do night-duty indefinitely. She had 
quite a little work with the malaria people, the boy who 
had unscrewed the nose-cap was a friend of ours and 
never rang at night unless it was necessary, but between 
the times of working we were together. I loved her 
very much and she loved me. I slept in the daytime 
and we wrote notes during the day w'hen w^e were awake 
and sent them by Ferguson. Ferguson was a fine girl. 
I never learned anything about her except that she 
had a brother in the Fifty-Second Division and a 
brother in Mesopotamia and she was very good to 
Catherine Barkley. 

‘Will you come to our wedding, Fergy?’ I said to 
her once. 

‘You’ll never get married.’ 

‘We will.’ 

‘No you won’t.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘You’ll fight before you’ll marry.’ 

‘We never fight.’ 

‘You’ve time yet.’ 

‘We don’t fight.’ 

‘You’ll die then. Fight or die. That’s what people 
do. They don’t marry.’ 

I reached for her hand. ‘Don’t take hold of me,’ 

117 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


she said. ‘I’m not crying. Maybe you’ll be all right 
you two. But watch out you don’t get her into trouble. 
You get her in trouble and I’ll kill you.’ 

T won’t get her in trouble.’ 

‘Well watch out then. I hope you’ll be all right. 
You have a good time.’ 

‘We have a fine time.’ 

‘Don’t fight then and don’t get her into trouble.’ 

‘I won’t.’ 

‘iVIind you watch out. I don’t want her with any of 
these war babies.’ 

‘You’re a fine girl, Fergy.’ 

‘I’m not. Don’t try to flatter me. How does your 
leg feel?’ 

‘Fine.’ 

‘How is your head?’ She touched the top of it with 
her fingers. It was sensitive like a foot that had gone to 
sleep. ‘It’s never bothered me.’ 

‘A bump like that could make you crazy. It never 
bothers you?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘You’re a lucky young man. Have you the letter done? 
I’m going down.’ 

‘It’s here,’ I said. 

‘You ought to ask her not to do night-duty for a while. 
She’s getting very tired.’ 

‘All right. IwiU.’ 

‘I want to do it but she won’t let me. The others 
are glad to let her have it. You might give her just a 
little rest.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Miss Van Campen spoke about you sleeping all the 
forenoons.’ 

ii8 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'She would.’ 

Tt would be better if you let her stay off nights a little 
while.’ 

T want her to.’ 

‘You do not. But if you would make her I’d respect 
you for it.’ 

T’ll make her.’ 

‘I don’t believe it.’ She took the note and w^ent out. 
I rang the bell and in a little while Miss Gage came in. 

‘What’s the matter?’ 

‘I just w^anted to talk to you. Don’t you think Miss 
Barkley ought to go off night-duty for a while? She 
looks awfully tired. Why does she stay on so long?’ 

Miss Gage looked at me. 

T’m a friend of yours,’ she said. You don’t have 
to talk to me like that.’ 

‘What do you mean?’ 

‘Don’t be silly. W^as that all you w^anted?’ 

‘Do you w^ant a vermouth?’ 

‘All right. Then I have to go.’ She got out the bottle 
from the armoire and brought a glass. 

‘You take the glass,’ I said. ‘I’ll drink out of the bottle.’ 

‘Here’s to you,’ said Miss Gage. 

‘'What did Van Campen say about me sleeping late 
in the mornings?’ 

‘She just jawed about it. She calls you our privileged 
patient.’ 

‘To hell with her.’ 

‘She isn’t mean,’ Miss Gage said. ‘She’s just old 
and cranky. She never liked you.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Well, I do. And I’m your friend. Don’t forget 
that.’ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘YouVe awfully damned nice/ 

^Xo. I know who you think is nice. But Fm your 
friend. How does vour leg feel.^’ 

Tine/ 

T’ll bring some cold mineral water to pour over it. 
It must itch under the cast. It’s hot outside.’ 

‘You’re awfully nice.’ 

‘Does it itch much?’ 

hXo. It’s fine.’ 

Til fix those sandbags better.’ She leaned over. T’m 
your friend/ 

T know you are,’ 

‘No you don’t. But you will some day.’ 

Catherine Barkley took three nights off night-duty, 
and then she came back on again. It was as though we 
met again after each of us had been away on a long 
journey. 


CHAPTER i8 


We had a lovely time that summer. When I could go 
out we rode in a carriage in the park. I remember the 
carriage, the horse going slowly, and up ahead the back 
of the driver with his varnished high hat, and Catherine 
Barkley sitting beside me. If we let our hands touch, 
just the side of my hand touching hers, we were ex- 
cited. Afterward when I could get around on crutches 
we went to dinner at Biffi’s or the Gran Italia and sat 
at the tables outside on the floor of the galleria. The waiters 
came in and out and there were people going by and 
candles with shades on the tablecloths and after we de- 

120 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

cided that we liked the Gran Italia bestj George ^ the 
head-waiter, saved us a table. He was a fine waiter 
and we let him order the meal while we looked at the 
people, and the great galleria in the dusk and each other. 
We drank dry white capri iced in a bucket; although we 
tried many of the other wines, fresa, barbera and the 
sweet wEite wines. They had no wine waiter because 
of the war and George would smile ashamedly when I 
asked about wines like fresa. 

Tf you imagine a country that makes a wine because 
it tastes like strawberries,’ he said. 

‘Why shouldn’t it?’ Catherine asked. Tt sounds 
splendid.’ 

‘You try it, lady,’ said George, if you w^ant to. But 
let me bring a little bottle of margaux for the Tenente.’ 

T’ll try it too, George.’ 

‘Sir, I can’t recommend you to. It doesn’t even taste 
like strawberries.’ 

Tt might,’ said Catherine, ‘It would be wonderful if 
it did.’ 

‘I’ll bring it,’ said George, ‘and when the lady is 
satisfied I’ll take it away.’ 

It w^as not much of a wine. As he said it did not 
even taste like straw-berries. We w^ent back to capri. 
One evening I w^as short of money and George loaned 
me a hundred lire. ‘That’s all right, Tenente,’ he said. 
‘I know how it is. I know how a man gets short. If 
you or the lady need money I’ve always got money.’ 

After dinner we walked through the galleria, past 
the other restaurants and the shops with their steel 
shutters down, and stopped at the little place where 
they sold sandwiches; ham and lettuce sandwiches and 
anchovy sandwiches made of very tiny brown glazed 

IZI 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

rolls and only about as long as your finger. They were 
to eat in the night when we were hungry. Then we got 
into an open carriage outside the galleria in front of 
the cathedral and rode to the hospital. At the door of 
the hospital the porter came out to help with the 
crutches. I paid the driver, and then we rode upstairs 
in the elevator. Catherine got off at the lower floor 
where the nurses lived and I went on up and went 
down the hall on crutches to my room; sometimes I un- 
dressed and got into bed and sometimes I sat out on the 
balcony with my leg up on another chair and watched 
the swallows over the roofs and waited for Catherine. 
WTien she came upstairs it was as though she had been 
away on a long trip and I went along the hall with her 
on the cmtches and carried the basins and waited out- 
side the doors, or went in with her; it depending on 
whether they were friends of ours or not, and when 
she had done all there was to be done we sat out on the 
balcony outside my room. Afterward I went to bed anH 
W'hen they were all asleep and she was sure they 
w’ould not call she came in. I loved to take her hair 
down and she sat on the bed and kept very still, except 
suddenly she would dip down to kiss me while I was 
doing it, and I would take out the pins and lay them 
sheet and it would be loose and I would watch 
her wMe she kept very still and then take out the last 
two pins and it would all come down and she would drop 
her head and we would both be inside of it, and it was 
the feeling of inside a tent or behind a falls. 

She had wonderfully beautiful hair and I would lie 
sometimes and watch her twisting it up in the light that 
came in the open door and it shone even in the night as 
water shines sometimes just before it is really daylight. 

133 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

She had a lovely face and body and lovely smooth skin 
too. We would be lying together and I would touch 
her cheeks and her forehead and under her eyes and 
her chin and throat with the tips of my fingers and say, 
‘Smooth as piano keys,’ and she would stroke my chin 
with her finger and say, ‘Smooth as emery paper and 
very hard on piano keys.’ 

‘Is it rough?’ 

‘No, darling. I was just making fun of you.’ 

It was lovely in the nights and if we could only 
touch each other we were happy. Besides all the big 
times we had many small ways of making love and we 
tried putting thoughts in the other one’s head %vhile we 
were in different rooms. It seemed to work sometimes 
but that was probably because we were thinking the 
same thing anyway. 

We said to each other that we were married the first 
day she had come to the hospital and -we counted 
months from our wedding day. I wanted to be really 
married but Catherine said that if we were they would 
send her away and if we merely started on the for- 
malities they would watch her and would break us up. 
We would have to be married under Italian law and 
the formalities were terrific. I wanted us to be married 
really because I worried about having a child if I 
thought about it, but we pretended to ourselves we were 
married and did not worry much and I suppose I en- 
joyed not being married, really. I know^ one night we 
talked about it and Catherine said, ‘But, darling, they’d 
send me a’way.’ 

‘Maybe they wouldn’t.’ 

‘They would. They’d send me home and then we 
would be apart until after the war.’ 

123 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘I’d come on leave.’ 

‘You couldn’t get to Scotland and back on a leave. 
Besides, I won’t leave you. What good would it do to 
marry now? We’re really married. I couldn t be any 
more married.’ 

‘I only wanted to for you.’ 

‘There isn’t any me. I’m you. Don’t make up a 
separate me.’ 

‘I thought girls always wanted to be married.’ 

‘They do. But, darling, I am married. I’m married 
to you. Don’t I make you a good wife?’ 

‘You’re a lovely wife.’ 

‘You see, darling, I had one experience of waiting to 
be married.’ 

‘I don’t want to hear about it.’ 

‘You know I don’t love anyone but you. You shouldn’t 
mind because someone else loved me.’ 

‘I do.’ 

‘You shouldn’t be jealous of someone who’s dead 
when you have everything.’ 

‘No, but I don’t want to hear about it.’ 

‘Poor darling. And I know you’ve been with all 
kinds of girls and it doesn’t matter to me.’ 

‘Couldn’t we be married privately some way? Then 
if an3rthing happened to me or if you had a 
child.’ 

‘There’s no way to be married except by church or 
state. We are married privately. You see, darling, it 
would mean everything to me if I had any religion. 
But I haven’t any religion.’ 

‘You gave me the Saint Anthony.’ 

‘That was for luck. Some one gave it to me.’ 

‘Then nothing worries you?’ 

124 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Only being sent away from you. YouTe my re- 
ligion. You’re all I’ve got.’ 

‘All right. But I’ll marry you the day you say.’ 

‘Don’t talk as though you had to make an honest 
woman of me, darling. I’m a very honest woman. You 
can’t be ashamed of something if you’re only happy 
and proud of it. Aren’t you happy?’ 

‘But you won’t ever leave me for someone else?’ 

‘No, darling. I won’t ever leave you for someone 
else. I suppose all sorts of dreadful things will happen 
to us. But you don’t have to worry about that.’ 

‘I don’t. But I love you so much and you did love 
someone else before.’ 

‘And what happened to him?’ 

‘He died.’ 

‘Yes and if he hadn’t I wouldn’t have met you. I’m 
not unfaithful, darling. I’ve plenty of faults but I’m 
very faithful. You’ll be sick of me I’ll be so faithful.’ 

‘I’ll have to go back to the front pretty soon.’ 

‘We won’t think about that until you go. You see 
I’m happy, darling, and we have a lovely time. I 
haven’t been happy for a long time and when I met you 
perhaps I was nearly crazy. Perhaps I was crazy. But 
now we’re happy and we love each other. Do let’s 
please just be happy. You are happy, aren’t you? Is 
there anything I do you don’t like? Can I do anything 
to please you? Would you like me to take dow'n my hair? 
Do you want to play?’ 

‘Yes and come to bed.’ 

‘All right. I’ll go and see the patients first.’ 


125 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 19 

The summer went that way. I do not remember 
much about the days, except that they were hot and 
that there were many victories in the papers. I was 
very healthy and my legs healed quickly so that it 
was not very long after I was first on crutches before 
I was through with them and walking with a cane. 
Then I started treatments at the Ospedale Maggiore 
for bending the knees, mechanical treatments, baking 
in a box of mirrors with violet rays, massage, and 
baths. I went over there afternoons, and afterward 
stopped at the cafe and had a drink and read the papers. 
I did not roam around the town; but wanted to get 
home to the hospital from the caf6. All I wanted was to 
see Catherine. The rest of the time I was glad to kill. 
Mostly I slept in the mornings, and in the afternoons, 
sometimes, I went to the races, and late to the me- 
chanical-therapy treatments. Sometimes I stopped in 
at the Anglo-American Club and sat in a deep leather- 
cushioned chair in front of the window and read the 
magazines. They would not let us go out together 
when I was off crutches because it was unseemly for 
a nurse to be seen unchaperoned with a patient who did 
not look as though he needed attendance, so we v/ere 
not together much in the afternoons. Although some- 
times we could go out to dinner if Ferguson went 
along. Miss Van Campen had accepted the status that 
we were great friends because she got a great amount 
of work out of Catherine. She thought Catherine 
came from very good people and that prejudiced her 

126 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

in her favour finally, Aliss Van Campen admired family 
Yery much and came from an excellent family herself. 
The hospital was quite busy, too, and that kept her 
occupied. It was a hot summer and I knew many 
people in Milan but always was anxious to get back 
home to the hospital as soon as the afternoon was over. 
At the front they w^ere advancing on the Carso, they 
had taken Kuk across from Plava and were taking the 
Bainsizza plateau. The West front did not sound so 
good. It looked as though the war were going on for 
a long time. We were in the war now but I thought it 
would take a year to get any great amount of troops 
over and train them for combat. Next year would be 
a bad year, or a good year maybe. The Italians were 
using up an awful amount of men. I did not see how 
it could go on. Even if they took all the Bainsizza and 
Monte San Gabriele there were plenty of mountains 
beyond for the Austrians. I had seen them. All the 
highest mountains were beyond. On the Carso they 
were going forward but there were marshes and 
swamps down by the sea. Napoleon would have 
whipped the Austrians on the plains. He never would 
have fought them in the mountains. He would have 
let them come down and whipped them around Verona. 
Still nobody was whipping any one on the Western 
front. Perhaps wars weren’t won any more. Maybe 
they went on forever. Maybe it was another Hundred 
Years’ War. I put the paper back on the rack and left 
the club. I went down the steps carefully and walked 
up the Via Manzoni. Outside the Gran Hotel I met 
old Meyers and his wife getting out of a carriage. They 
were coming back from the races. She was a big* 
busted woman in black satin. He was short and old, 

127 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

with a white moustache and walked flat-footed with a 
cane. 

‘How do you do? How do you do?’ She shook hands. 
‘Hello,’ said Meyers. 

‘How were the races?’ 

‘Fine. They were just lovely. I had three winners.’ 

‘How did you do?’ I asked Meyers. 

‘All right. I had a winner.’ 

‘I never know how he does,’ Mrs. Meyers said. ‘He 
never tells me.’ 

‘I do all right,’ Meyers said. He was being cordial. 
‘You ought to come out.’ While he talked you had the 
impression that he was not looking at you or that he 
mistook you for someone else. 

‘I w'ill,’ I said. 

‘I’m coming up to the hospital to see you,’ Mrs. 
Meyers said. ‘I have some things for my boys. You’re 
all my boys. You certainly are my dear boys.’ 

‘They’ll be glad to see you.’ 

‘Those dear boys. You too. You’re one of my 
boys.’ 

‘I have to get back,’ I said. 

‘You give my love to all those dear boys. I’ve got lots 
of things to bring. I’ve some fine Marsala and cakes.’ 

‘Good-bye,’ I said. ‘They’ll be awfully glad to see you.’ 

‘Good-bye,’ said Meyers. ‘You come around to the 
galleria. You know where my table is. We’re all there 
every afternoon.’ I went on up the street. I wanted 
to buy something at the Cova to take to Catherine. In- 
side, at the Cova, I bought a box of chocolate and while 
the girl wrapped it up I walked over to the bar. There 
were a couple of British and some aviators. I had a 
martini alone, paid for it, picked up the box of chocolate 

128 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


at the outside counter and walked on home toward 
the hospital. Outside the little bar up the street from 
the Scala there were some people I knew, a vice-consul, 
two fellows who studied singing, and Ettore Aloretti, 
an Italian from San Francisco who was in the Italian 
army. I had a drink with them. One of the singers 
was named Ralph Simmons, and he was singing under 
the name of Enrico Del Credo. I never knew how well 
he could sing but he was always on the point of some- 
thing very big happening. He was fat and looked 
shopw'om around the nose and mouth as though he 
had hay- fever. He had come back from singing in 
Piacenza. He had sung Tosca and it had been won- 
derful. 

‘Of course youVe never heard me sing,’ he said. 

‘When will you sing here?’ 

‘Fli be at the Scala in the fall.’ 

‘I’ll bet they thrown the benches at you,’ Ettore said. 
‘Did you hear how they threw the benches at him in 
Modena?’ 

‘It’s a damned lie.’ 

‘They threw the benches at him,’ Ettore said. ‘I 
was there. I threw six benches myself.’ 

‘You’re just a wop from Frisco.’ 

‘He can’t pronounce Italian,’ Ettore said. ‘Everywhere 
he goes they throw the benches at him.’ 

‘Piacenza’s the toughest house to sing in the north 
of Italy,’ the other tenor said. ‘Believe me that’s a 
tough little house to sing.’ This tenor’s name was Edgar 
Saunders, and he sang under the name of Edouardo 
Giovanni. 

‘I’d like to be there to see them throw the benches at 
you,’ Ettore said. ‘You can’t sing Italian,’ 

I 129 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'He’s a nut/ said Edgar Saunders. 'All he knows 
how to say is throw benches.’ 

'That’s all they know how to do when you two sing/ 
Ettore said. 'Then when you go to America you’ll tell 
about your triumphs at the Scala. They wouldn’t let you 
get by the first note at the Scala.’ 

T’ll sing at the Scala/ Simmons said. 'I’m going to 
sing Tosca in October.’ 

'We’ll go, won’t -we, Mac?’ Ettore said to the vice- 
consul. 'They’ll need somebody to protect them.’ 

'Maybe the American army will be there to protect 
them,’ the vice-consul said. 'Do you want another 
drink, Simmons? You want a drink, Saunders?’ 

'All right,’ said Saunders. 

'I hear you’re going to get the silver medal,’ Ettore 
said to me. 'What kind of citation you going to get?’ 

'I don’t know. I don’t know I’m going to get it.’ 

‘You’re going to get it. Oh boy, the girls at the 
Cova will think you’re fine then. They’ll all think you 
killed two hundred Austrians or captured a whole 
trench by yourself. Believe me, I got to work for my 
decorations.’ 

'How many have you got, Ettore?’ asked the vice- 
consul. 

'He’s got everything,’ Simmons said. 'He’s the boy 
they’re running the war for.’ 

'I’ve got the bronze twice and three silver medals,’ 
said Ettore. 'But the papers on only one have come 
through.’ 

'What’s the matter with the others?’ asked Simmons. 

‘The action wasn’t successful,’ said Ettore. 'When 
the action isn’t successful they hold up all the medals.’ 

'How many times have you been wounded, Ettore?’ 

130 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


"Three times bad. I got three wound-stripes. See?' 
He pulled his sleeve around. The stripes were parallel 
silver lines on a black background sewed to the cloth 
of the sleeve about eight inches below the shoulder. 

"You got one too,’ Ettore said to me. "Believe me 
they’re fine to have. Fd rather have them than medals. 
Believe me, boy, when you get three you’ve got some- 
thing. You only get one for a wound that puts you 
three months in the hospital.’ 

"Where were you wounded, Ettore?’ asked the vice- 
consul. 

Ettore pulled up his sleeve. "Here,’ he showed the 
deep smooth red scar. "Here on my leg. I can’t show 
you that because I got puttees on ; and in the foot. 
There’s dead bone in my foot that stinks right now. 
Every morning I take new little pieces out and it stinks 
all the time.’ 

‘What hit you?’ asked Simmons. 

"A hand grenade. One of those potato mashers. It 
just blew the whole side of my foot off. You know 
those potato mashers?’ He turned to me. 

‘Sure.’ 

"I saw the son of a bitch throw it,’ Ettore said. ‘It 
Imocked me down and I thought I was dead all right 
but those damn potato mashers haven’t got an3rthmg 
in them. I shot the son of a bitch with my rifle. I 
always carry a rifle so they can’t tell I’m an officer.’ 

"How did he look?’ asked Simmons. 

"That was the only one he had,’ Ettore said. "I don’t 
know why he threw it. I guess he always wanted to 
throw one. He never saw any real fighting probably. 
I shot the son of a bitch all right.’ 

"How did he look when you shot him?’ Simmons asked. 

131 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Hell, how should I know,’ said Ettore. ‘I shot him 
in the belly. I was afraid I’d miss him if I shot him in 
the head.’ 

‘How long have you been an officer, Ettore?’ I 
asked. 

‘Two years. I’m going to be a captain. How long 
have you been a lieutenant?’ 

‘Going on three years.’ 

‘You can’t be a captain because you don’t know the 
Italian language well enough,’ Ettore said. ‘You can 
talk but you can’t read and write well enough. You 
got to have an education to be a captain. Why don’t 
you go in the American army?’ 

‘Maybe I will.’ 

‘I wish to God I could. Oh boy, how much does a 
captain get, Mac?’ 

‘I don’t know exactly. Around two hundred and 
fifty dollars, I think.’ 

‘Jesus Christ, what I could do with two hundred 
and fifty dollars. You better get in the American army 
quick, Fred. See if you can’t get me in.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘I can command a company in Italian. I could learn 
it in English easy.’ 

‘You’d be a general,’ said Sinunons. 

‘No, I don’t know enough to be a general. A general’s 
got to know a hell of a lot. You guys think there ain’t 
anything to war. You ain’t got brains enough to be a 
second-class corporal.’ 

‘Thank God I don’t have to be,’ Simmons said. 

‘Maybe you will if they round up all you slackers. 
Oh boy, I’d like to have you two in my platoon. Mac 
too. I’d make you my orderly, Mac.’ 

132 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘You’re a great boy, Ettore,’ Mac said. ‘But I’m 
afraid you’re a militarist.’ 

‘I’ll be a colonel before the war’s over,’ Ettore said. 

‘If they don’t kill you.’ 

‘They won’t kill me.’ He touched the stars at his 
collar with his thumb and forefinger. ‘See me do that? 
We always touch our stars if anybody mentions getting 
killed.’ 

‘Let’s go, Sim,’ said Saunders standing up. 

‘All right.’ 

‘So long,’ I said. T have to go too.’ It was a quarter 
to six by the clock inside the bar. ‘Ciaou, Ettore.’ 

‘Ciaou, Fred,’ said Ettore. ‘That’s pretty fine you’re 
going to get the silver medal.’ 

‘I don’t know I’ll get it.’ 

‘You’ll get it all right, Fred. I heard you were going 
to get it all right.’ 

‘Well, so long,’ I said. ‘Keep out of trouble, Ettore.’ 

‘Don’t worry about me. I don’t drink and I don’t 
run around. I’m no boozer and whorehound. I know 
what’s good for me.’ 

‘So long,’ I said. ‘I’m glad you’re going to be pro- 
moted captain.’ 

‘I don’t have to wait to be promoted. I’m going to 
be a captain for merit of war. You know. Three stars 
with the crossed sw'ords and crown above. That’s me.’ 

‘Good luck.’ 

‘Good luck. When you going back to the front?’ 

‘Pretty soon.’ 

‘Well, I’ll see you around.’ 

‘So long.’ 

‘So long. Don’t take any bad nickels.’ 

I walked on down a back street that led to a cross- 

133 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


cut to the hospital. Ettore was twenty-three. He had 
been brought up by an uncle in San Francisco and was 
visiting his father and mother in Torino when war was 
declared. He had a sister, who had been sent to America 
with him at the same time to live with the uncle, who 
would graduate from normal school this year. He was 
a legitimate hero w'ho bored every one he met. Catherine 
could not stand him. 

‘We have heroes too,’ she said. ‘But usually, darling, 
they’re much quieter.’ 

‘I don’t mind him.’ 

‘I wouldn’t mind him if he wasn’t so conceited and 
didn’t bore me, and bore me, and bore me.’ 

‘He bores me.’ 

‘You’re sweet to say so, darling. But you don’t 
need to. You can picture him at the front and you 
know' he’s useful but he’s so much the type of boy I 
don’t care for.’ 

‘I know.’ 

‘You’re awfully sweet to know, and I try and like 
him but he’s a dreadful, dreadful boy really.’ 

‘He said this afternoon he was going to be a captain.’ 

I m glad, said Catherine. ‘That should please him.’ 

‘Wouldn’t you like me to have some more exalted 
rank?’ 

‘No, darling. I only want you to have enough rank 
so that we’re admitted to the better restaurants.’ 

‘That’s just the rank I have.’ 

‘You have a splendid rank. I don’t want you to 
have any more rank. It might go to your head. Oh, 
darling, I’m awfully glad you’re not conceited. I’d 
have married you even if you w'ere conceited but it’s 
very restful to have a husband who’s not conceited.’ 

134 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


We were talking softly out on the balcony. The 
moon was supposed to rise but there was a mist over 
the town and it did not come up and in a little while 
it started to drizzle and w^e came in. Outside the mist 
turned to rain and in a little while it was raining hard 
and we heard it drumming on the roof. I got up and 
stood at the door to see if it was raining in but it wasn’t 
so I left the door open. 

‘Who else did you see?’ Catherine asked. 

‘Mr. and Mrs. Meyers.’ 

‘They’re a strange lot.’ 

‘He’s supposed to have been in the penitentiary at 
home. They let him out to die.’ 

‘And he lived happily in Milan forever after.’ 

‘I don’t know how happily.’ 

‘Happily enough after jail I should think.’ 

‘She’s bringing some things here.’ 

‘She brings splendid things. Were you her dear 
boy?’ 

‘One of them.’ 

‘You are all her dear boys/ Catherine said. ‘She 
prefers the dear boys. Listen to it rain.’ 

‘It’s raining hard.’ 

‘And you’ll always love me, won’t you?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘And the rain won’t make any difference?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘That’s good. Because I’m afraid of the rain.’ 

‘Why?’ I was sleepy. Outside the rain was falling 
steadily. 

‘I don’t loiow, darling. I’ve always been afraid of 
the rain. 

‘I like it.’ 


135 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T like to walk in it. But it’s very hard on loving.’ 

T’ll love you always.’ 

T’ll love you in the rain and in the snow and in the 
hail and - what else is there?’ 

T don’t know. I guess I’m sleepy.’ 

‘Go to sleep, darling, and I’ll love you no matter how 
it is.’ 

‘You’re not really afraid of the rain are you?’ 

‘Not when I’m with you.’ 

‘Why are you afraid of it? 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Tell me.’ 

‘Don’t make me.’ 

‘Tell me.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Tell me.’ 

‘All right. I’m afraid of the rain because sometimes 
I see me dead in it.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘And sometimes I see you dead in it.’ 

‘That’s more likely.’ 

No its not, darling. Because I can keep you safe. 

I know I can. But nobody can help themselves.’ 

‘Please stop it. I don’t want you to get Scotch and 
crazy to-night. We won’t be together much longer.’ 

‘No, but I am Scotch and crazy. But I’ll stop it. 
It’s all nonsense.’ 

‘Yes it’s all nonsense.’ 

‘It’s aU nonsense. It’s only nonsense. I’m not afraid 
of the ram. I’m not afraid of the rain. Oh, oh, God, 

I wish I wasn’t.’ She was crying. I comforted her 

and she stopped crying. But outside it kept on 
rammg. ^ 


136 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 20 


One day in the afternoon we went to the races. Fer- 
guson went too and Crowell Rodgers, the boy who had 
been wounded in the eyes by the explosion of the shell 
nose-cap. The girls dressed to go after lunch while 
Crowell and I sat on the bed in his room and read the 
past performances of the horses and the predictions in 
the racing paper. Crowell’s head was bandaged and 
he did not care much about these races but read the racing 
paper constantly and kept track of all the horses for 
something to do. He said the horses were a terrible 
lot but they were all the horses we had. Old Meyers 
liked him and gave him tips. Meyers v/on on nearly 
every race but disliked to give tips because it brought 
down the prices. The racing was very crooked. Men 
who had been ruled off the turf everywhere else were 
racing in Italy. Meyers’ information was good but I 
hated to ask him because sometimes he did not answ^er, 
and always you could see it hurt him to tell you, but he 
felt obligated to tell us for some reason and he hated 
less to tell Crowell. Crowell’s eyes had been hurt, one 
was hurt badly, and Meyers had trouble with his eyes 
and so he liked Crowell. Meyers never told his wife 
what horses he was playing and she won or lost, mostly 
lost, and talked all the time. 

We four drove out to San Siro in an open carriage. 
It was a lovely day and we drove out through the park 
and out along the tramway and out of town where the 
road was dusty. There were villas with iron fences and 
big overgrown gardens and ditches with water flowing 

137 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

and green vegetable gardens with dust on the leaves. 
We could look across the plain and see farmhouses 
and the rich green farms with their irrigation ditches 
and the mountains to the north. There were many car- 
riages going into the race-track and the men at the 
gate let us in without cards because we w^ere in uniform. 
We left the carriage, bought programmes, and walked 
across the infield and then across the smooth thick turf 
of the course to the paddock. The grand stands were old 
and made of wood and the betting booths were under 
the stands and in a row out near the stables. There 
was a crowd of soldiers along the fence in the infield. 
The paddock was fairly well filled with people and they 
were walking the horses around in a ring under the trees 
behind the grand stand. We saw people we knew and got 
chairs for Ferguson and Catherine and watched the horses. 

They went around one after the other their heads 
down, the grooms leading them. One horse, a purplish 
black, Crow^ell sw'ore was dyed that colour. We watched 
him and it seemed possible. He had only come out 
just before the bell rang to saddle. We looked him up 
in the programme from the number on the groom’s 
arm and it was listed a black gelding named Japalac. 
The race was for horses that had never won a race worth 
one thousand lire or more. Catherine was sure his 
colour had been changed. Ferguson said she could not 
tell. I thought he looked suspicious. We all agreed we 
ought to back him and pooled one hundred lire. The 
odds sheets showed he would pay thirty-five to one. 
Crowell went over and bought the tickets while we 
watched the jockeys ride around once more and then go 
out under the trees to the track and gallop slowly up to 
the turn where the start was to be. 

138 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

We went up in the grand stand to watch the race. 
They had no elastic barrier at San Siro then and the 
starter lined up all the horses, they looked very small 
way up the track, and then sent them off with a crack 
of his long whip. They came past us with the black 
horse well in front and on the turn he was running 
away from the others. I w'atched them on the far side 
with the glasses and saw the jockey fighting to hold 
him in but he could not hold him and when they came 
around the turn and into the stretch the black horse 
was fifteen lengths ahead of the others. He went way 
on up and around the turn after the finish. 

‘Isn’t it wonderful,’ Catherine said. ‘We’ll have 
over three thousand lire. He must be a splendid 
horse.’ 

‘I hope his colour doesn’t run,’ Crowell said, ‘before 
they pay off.’ 

‘He was really a lovely horse,’ Catherine said. ‘I 
wonder if Mr. Meyers backed him.’ 

‘Did you have the winner?’ I called to Meyers. He 
nodded. 

‘I didn’t,’ Mrs. Meyers said. ‘Who did you children 
bet on?’ 

‘Japalac.’ 

‘Really? He’s thirty-five to one!’ 

‘We liked his colour.’ 

‘I didn’t. I thought he looked seedy. They told me 
not to back him.’ 

‘He won’t pay much,’ Meyers said. 

‘He’s marked thirty-five to one in the quotes,’ I said. 

‘He w'on’t pay much. At the last minute,’ Meyers 
said, ‘they put a lot of money on him.’ 

‘Who?’ 


139 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Kempton and the boys. You’ll see. He won’t pay 
two to one.’ 

‘Then we won’t get three thousand lire,’ Catherine 
said. ‘I don’t like this crooked racing!’ 

‘We’ll get two hundred lire.’ 

‘That’s nothing. That doesn’t do us any good. I 
thought we were going to get three thousand.’ 

‘It’s crooked and disgusting,’ Ferguson said. 

‘Of course,’ said Catherine, ‘if it hadn’t been crooked 
we’d never have backed him at all. But I would have 
liked the three thousand lire.’ 

‘Let’s go down and get a drink and see what they 
pay,’ Crowell said. We went out to where they posted 
the numbers and the bell rang to pay off and they put 
up 18.50 after Japalac to win. That meant he paid less 
than even money on a ten-lire bet. 

We went to the bar under the grand stand and had 
a w'hisky and soda apiece. We ran into a couple of 
Italians we knew and McAdams, the vice-consul, and 
they came up with us when we joined the girls. The 
Italians were full of manners and McAdams talked to 
Catherine while we went down to bet again. Mr. Meyers 
was standing near the pari mutuel. 

‘Ask him what he played,’ I said to Crowell. 

‘What are you on, Mr. Meyers?’ Crow'ell asked. 
Meyers took out his programme and pointed to the 
number five with his pencil. 

‘Do you mind if we play him too?’ Crowell asked. 

‘Go ahead. Go ahead. But don’t tell my wife I gave 
it to you.’ 

‘Will you have a drink?’ I asked. 

‘No thanks. I never drink.’ 

We put a hundred lire on number five to win and a 

140 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

hundred to place and then had another whisky and 
soda apiece. I was feeling very good and we picked up 
a couple more Italians, who each had a drink with us, 
and went back to the girls. These Italians were also 
very mannered and matched manners with the two we 
had collected before. In a little while no one could sit 
down. I gave the tickets to Catherine. 

‘What horse is it?’ 

‘I don’t know. Mr. Meyers’ choice.’ 

‘Don’t you even know the name?’ 

‘No. You can find it on the programme. Number 
five I think.’ 

‘You have touching faith,’ she said. The number 
five won but did not pay anything. Mr. Meyers was 
angry. 

‘You have to put up two hundred lire to make twenty,’ 
he said. ‘Twelve lire for ten. It’s not w^orth it. My wife 
lost twenty lire.’ 

‘I’ll go down with you,’ Catherine said to me. The 
Italians all stood up. We went downstairs and out to the 
paddock. 

‘Do you like this?’ Catherine asked. 

‘Yes. I guess I do.’ 

‘It’s all right, I suppose,’ she said. ‘But, darling, I 
can’t stand to see so many people.’ 

‘We don’t see many.’ 

‘No. But those Meyers and the man from the bank 
with his wife and daughters -’ 

‘He cashes my sight drafts,’ I said. 

‘Yes but some one else would if he didn’t. Those 
last four boys were awful.’ 

‘We can stay out here and watch the race from the 
fence.’ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘That will be lovely. And, darling, let’s back a horse 
we’ve never heard of and that Mr. Meyers won’t be 
backing.’ 

‘All right.’ 

We backed a horse named Light For Me that finished 
fourth in a field of five. We leaned on the fence and 
watched the horses go by, their hoofs thudding as they 
went past, and saw the mountains off in the distance and 
Milan beyond the trees and the fields. 

‘I feel so much cleaner,’ Catherine said. The horses 
were coming back, through the gate, wet and sweating, 
the jockeys quieting them and riding up to dismount 
under the trees. 

‘Wouldn’t you like a drink? We could have one out 
here and see the horses.’ 

‘I’ll get them,’ I said. 

‘The boy will bring them.’ Catherine said. She put 
her hand up and the boy came out from the Pagoda 
bar beside the stables. We sat down at a round iron table. 

‘Don’t you like it better when we’re alone?’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. 

‘I felt very lonely when they were all there.’ 

‘It’s grand here,’ I said. 

‘Yes, It’s really a pretty course.’ 

‘It’s nice.’ 

‘Don’t let me spoil your fun, darling. I’ll go back 
whenever you want.’ 

No,’ I said. ‘We’ll stay here and have our drink. 
Then we’ll go down and stand at the water-jump for the 
steeplechase.’ 

‘You’re awfully good to me,’ she said. 

After we had been alone awhile we were glad to see 
the others again. We had a good time. 

143 



A FAREWELL TO AR^IS 


CHAPTER 21 

In September the first cool nights came^ then the 
da^-^s were cool and the leaves on the trees in the park 
began to turn colour and we knew the summer was gone. 
The fighting at the front went very badly and they 
could not take San Gabriele. The fighting on the Bain- 
sizza plateau was over and by the middle of the month 
the fighting for San Gabriele was about over too. They 
could not take it. Ettore was gone back to the front. 
The horses were gone to Rome and there was no more 
racing. Crowell had gone to Rome too, to be sent back 
to xAmerica. There were riots twice in the town against 
the war and bad rioting in Turin. A British major at 
the club told me the Italians had lost one hundred and 
fifty thousand men on the Bainsizza plateau and on 
San Gabriele. He said they had lost forty thousand 
on the Carso besides. We had a drink and he talked. 
He said the fighting was over for the year down here 
and that the Italians had bitten off more than they 
could chew. He said the offensive in Flanders was going 
to the bad. If they killed men as they did this fall the 
Allies would be cooked in another year. He said we 
were all cooked but we were all right as long as we did 
not know it. We were all cooked. The thing was not 
to recognize it. The last country to realize they w^ere 
cooked w^ould win the war. We had another drink. 
Was I on somebody’s staff? No. He was. We were 
alone in the club sitting back in one of the big leather 
sofas. His boots were smoothly polished dull leather. 
They were beautiful boots. He said it was all rot. They 

143 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

thought only in divisions and man-power. They all 
squabbled about divisions and only killed them when they 
got them. They were all cooked . The Germans won the 
victories. By God they were soldiers. The old Hun was 
a soldier. But they were cooked too. We were all cooked. 
I asked about Russia. He said they were cooked already. 
I’d soon see they were cooked. Then the Austrians 
were cooked too. If they got some Hun divisions they 
could do it. Did he think they would attack this fall? 
Of course they would. The Italians were cooked. Every- 
body knew they were cooked. The old Hun would come 
down through the Trentino and cut the railway at Vicenza 
and then where would the Italians be? They tried that 
in ’sixteen, I said. Not with Germans. Yes, I said. 
But they probably wouldn’t do that, he said. It was too 
simple. They’d try something complicated and get 
royally cooked. I had to go, I said. I had to get back 
to the hospital. ‘Good-bye,’ he said. Then cheerily, 
‘Every sort of luck !’ There was a great contrast between 
his world pessimism and personal cheeriness. 

I stopped at a barber shop and was shaved and went 
home to the hospital. My leg was as well as it would 
get for a long time. I had been up for examination 
three days before. There were still some treatments to 
take before my course at the Ospedale Maggiore was 
finished and I walked along the side street practising 
not limping. An old man was cutting silhouettes -under 
an arcade. I stopped to watch him. Two girls were 
posing and he cut their silhouettes together, snipping very 
fast and looking at them, his head on one side. 'The girls 
were giggling. He showed me the silhouettes before he 
pasted them on white paper and handed them to the girls. 

‘They’re beautiful,’ he said. ‘How about you, Tenente?’ 

144 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


The girls went away looking at their silhouettes and 
laughing. They were nice-looking girls. One of them 
worked in the wine shop across from the hospital. 

'All right/ I said. 

'Take your cap off.’ 

'No. With it on.’ 

Tt wall not be so beautiful/ the old man said. 'But/ 
he brightened, 'it will be more military,’ 

He snipped away at the black paper, then separated 
the two thicknesses and pasted the profiles on a card 
and handed them to me. 

'How much?’ 

'That’s all right.’ He waved his hand, 'I just made 
them for you.’ 

'Please.’ I brought out some coppers. 'For pleasure.’ 

'No. I did them for a pleasure. Give them to your girl.’ 

‘Many thanks until we meet.’ 

'Until I see thee.’ 

I went on to the hospital. There were some letters, 
an official one, and some others. I was to have three 
weeks’ convalescent leave and then return to the front. 
I read it over carefully. Well, that was that. The con- 
valescent leave started October fourth wffien my course 
was finished. Three weeks was twenty- one days. That 
made October tw^enty-fifth. I told them I would not 
be in and went to the restaurant a little way up the 
street from the hospital for supper and read my letters 
and the Corner e della Sera at the table. There \^as a 
letter from my grandfather, containing family news, 
patriotic encouragement, a draft for tw’'o hundred dollars, 
and a few clippings ; a dull letter from the priest at 
our mess; a letter from a man I knew who was flying 
with the French and had gotten in with a wild gang 

K 145 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


and was telling about it, and a note from Rinaldi asking 
me how long I was going to skulk in Milano and what 
was all the news? He wanted me to bring him phono- 
graph records and enclosed a list. I drank a small bottle 
of chianti with the meal, had a coffee afterward with 
a glass of cognac, finished the paper, put my letters in 
my pocket, left the paper on the table with the tip and 
went out. In my room at the hospital I undressed, put 
on pyjamas and a dressing-gown, pulled down the cur- 
tains on the door that opened on to the balcony and 
sitting up in bed read Boston papers from a pile Mrs. 
Meyers had left for her boys at the hospital. The 
Chicago White Sox were winning the American League 
pennant and the New York Giants were leading the 
National League. Babe Ruth was a pitcher then playing 
for Boston. The papers were dull, the news was local and 
stale, and the war news was all old. The American 
news was all training camps. I was glad I wasn’t in a 
training camp. The baseball news was all I could read 
and I did not have the slightest interest in it. A number 
of papers together made it impossible to read with 
interest. It was not very timely but I read at it for a while. 
I wondered if America really got into the war, if they 
would close down the major leagues. They probably 
wouldn’t. There was still racing in Milan and the war 
could not be much worse. They had stopped racing in 
France. That was where our horse Japalac came from. 
Catherine was not due on duty until nine o’clock. I 
heard her passing along the floor when she first came on 
duty and once saw her pass in the hall. She w^ent to 
several other rooms and finally came into mine. 

T’m late, darling,’ she said. ‘There was a lot to do. 
How are you?’ 


146 



A FAREWELL TO AR:\IS 


I told her about my papers and the leave. 

'That’s lovely/ she said. A\'here do you want to go:’ 
'Nowhere. I want to stay here.’ 

'That’s silly. You pick a place to go and 111 come too/ 
'How’ will you work it?’ 

T don’t know. But I will.’ 

'You’re pretty wonderful.’ 

'No I’m not. But life isn’t hard to manage w'hen 
you’ve nothing to lose.’ 

'How do you mean?’ 

'Nothing. I was only thinking how small obstacles 
seemed that once were so big.’ 

'I should think it might be hard to manage.’ 

'No it won’t, darling. If necessary I’ll simply leave. 
But it won’t come to that.’ 

'Where should we go?’ 

'I don’t care. Anpvhere you want. Anpvhere we 
don’t Icnow people.’ 

'Don’t you care where we go?’ 

'No. rii like any place.’ 

She seemed upset and taut. 

'What’s the matter, Catherine?’ 

'Nothing. Nothing’s the matter.’ 

‘Yes there is.’ 

'No, nothing. Really nothing.’ 

‘I know there is. Tell me, darling. You can tell me.’ 
'It’s nothing.’ 

'Tell me.’ 

'I don’t want to. I’m afraid I’ll make you unhappy or 
worry you.’ 

'No it won’t/ 

'You’re sure? It doesn’t worry me but I’m afraid 
to worry you.’ 


147 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Tt won’t if it doesn’t worry you.’ 

T don’t want to tell.’ 

‘Tell it.’ 

‘Do I have to?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘I’m going to have a baby, darling. It’s almost three 
months along. You’re not worried, are you? Please, 
please don’t. You mustn’t worry.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Is it all right?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

‘I did everything. I took everything but it didn’t 
make any difference.’ 

‘I’m not worried.’ 

‘I couldn’t help it, darling, and I haven’t worried 
about it. You mustn’t worry or feel badly.’ 

‘ I only worry ab out you . ’ 

‘That’s it. That’s what you mustn’t do. People 
have babies all the time. Everybody has babies. It’s 
a natural thing.’ 

‘You’re pretty wonderful.’ 

‘No I’m not. But you mustn’t mind, darling. I’ll 
try and not make trouble for you. I know I’ve made 
trouble before. But haven’t I been a good girl until now? 
You never knew it, did you?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘It will all be like that. You simply mustn’t worry. 
I can see you’re worrying. Stop it. Stop it right away. 
Wouldn’t you like a drink, darling? I know a drink 
always makes you feel cheerful.’ 

‘No. I feel cheerful. And you’re pretty wonderful.’ 

‘No I’m not. But I’ll fix everything to be together 
if you pick out a place for us to go. It ought to be 

148 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


lovely in October, Well have a lovely time^ darling, 
and 111 write you every day while youTe at the front.’ 

^ Where will you be?’ 

T don’t know yet. But somewhere splendid. Ill 
look after all that.’ 

We were quiet awhile and did not talk. Catherine 
was sitting on the bed and I was looking at her but we 
did not touch each other. We were apart as when some 
one comes into a room and people are self-conscious. 
She put out her hand and took mine. 

'You aren’t angiy^ are you, darling?’ 

'No.’ 

'And you don’t feel trapped?’ 

‘jMaybe a little. But not by you.’ 

‘I didn’t mean by me. You mustn’t be stupid. I 
meant trapped at all.’ 

‘You always feel trapped biologically.’ 

She went away a long way without stirring or removing 
her hand. 

'Always isn’t a pretty word.’ 

T’m sorry.’ 

'It’s all right. But you see I’ve never had a baby 
and I’ve never even loved anyone. And I’ve tried to 
be the way you wanted and then you talk about 
" always.” ’ 

'I could cut off my tongue,’ I offered. 

'Oh, darling!’ she came back from wherever she had 
been. 'You mustn’t mind me.’ We were both together 
again and the self-consciousness was gone. 'We really 
are the same one and we mustn’t misunderstand on 
purpose.’ 

'We won’t.’ 

'But people do. They love each other and they 

149 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


misunderstand on purpose and they fight and then 
suddenly they aren’t the same one.’ 

‘We won’t fight.’ 

SVe mustn’t. Because there’s only us two and in 
the world there’s all the rest of them. If anything comes 
bet^veen us we’re gone and then they have us.’ 

‘They won’t get us,’ I said. ‘Because you’re too brave. 
Nothing ever happens to the brave.’ 

‘They die of course.’ 

‘But only once.’ 

‘I don’t know. Who said that?’ 

‘The coward dies a thousand deaths, the brave but one?’ 

‘Of course. Who said it?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘He was probably a coward,’ she said. ‘He knew 
a great deal about cowards but nothing about the brave. 
The brave dies perhaps two thousand deaths if he’s in- 
telligent, He simply doesn’t mention them,’ 

‘I don’t know. It’s hard to see inside the head of the 
brave.’ 

‘Yes. That’s how they keep that way.’ 

‘You’re an authority.’ 

‘You’re right, darling. That was deserved.’ 

‘You’re brave.’ 

‘No,’ she said. ‘But I would like to be.’ 

‘I’m not,’ I said, ‘I know where I stand. I’ve been 
out long enough to know. I’m like a ball-player that 
bats two hundred and thirty and knows he’s no better.’ 

‘What is a ball-player that bats two hundred and 
thirty? It’s awfully impressive.’ 

Tt’s not. It means a mediocre hitter in baseball.’ 

‘But still a hitter,’ she prodded me. 

‘Iguess we’re both conceited,’ I said. ‘But you are brave.’ 

ISO 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Xo. But I hope to be/ 

nVeVe both brave/ I said. ^And I^m very brave when 
Fve had a drink. ^ 

'We’re splendid people/ Catherine said. She went 
over to the armoire and brought me the cognac and a 
glass. 'Have a drink, darling/ she said. 'YouVe been 
awfully good.’ 

T don’t really want one.’ 

'Take one.’ 

'All right.’ I poured the water glass a third full of 
cognac and drank it off. 

'That was very big/ she said. T know brandy is 
for heroes. But you shouldn’t exaggerate.’ 

‘Where will we live after the w^ar?’ 

Tn an old people’s home probably/ she said. ‘For 
three years I looked forward very childishly to the war 
ending at Christmas. But now I look forward till when 
our son will be a lieutenant-commander.’ 

‘IMaybe he’ll be a general.’ 

‘If it’s a hundred years’ war he’ll have time to try 
both of the services.’ 

‘Don’t you want a drink?’ 

‘Xo. It always makes you happy, darling, and it only 
makes me dizzy.’ 

‘Didn’t you ever drink brandy?’ 

‘No, darling. I’m a very^ old-fashioned wife.’ 

I reached down to the floor for the bottle and poured 
another drink. 

T’d better go to have a look at your compatriots,’ 
Catherine said. ‘Perhaps you’ll read the papers until I 
come back.’ 

‘Do you have to go?’ 

‘Now or later.’ 

151 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘All right. Now.’ 

‘I’ll come back later.’ 

‘I’ll have finished the papers,’ I said. 


CHAPTER 22 

It turned cold that night and the next day it was 
raining. Coming home from the Ospedale Maggiore 
it rained very hard and I was wet when I came in. Up 
in my room the rain was coming down heavily outside 
on the balcony, and the wind blew it against the glass 
doors. I changed my clothing and drank some brandy 
but the brandy did not taste good. I felt sick in the 
night and in the morning after breakfast I was nauseated. 

‘There is no doubt about it,’ the house surgeon said. 
‘Look at the whites of his eyes. Miss.’ 

Miss Gage looked. They had me look in a glass. The 
whites of the eyes were yellow and it was the jaundice. 
I was sick for two weeks with it. For that reason we 
did not spend a convalescent leave together. We had 
planned to go to Pallanza on Lago Maggiore. It is 
nice there in the fall when the leaves turn. There are 
walks you can take and you can troll for trout in the 
lake. It would have been better than Stresa because 
there are fewer people at Pallanza. Stresa is so easy 
to get to from Milan that there are always people you 
know. There is a nice village at Pallanza and you can 
row out to the islands where the fishermen live and 
there is a restaurant on the biggest island. But we 
did not go. 


15a 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

One day while I was in bed wdth jaundice Aliss Van 
Campen came in the room, opened the door into the 
armoire and saw the empty bottles there. I had sent a 
load of them down by the porter and I believe she must 
have seen them going out and come up to find some 
more. They w^ere mostly vermouth bottles, marsala 
bottles, capri bottles, empty chianti flasks and a few' 
cognac bottles. The porter had carried out the large 
bottles, those that had held vermouth, and the straw- 
covered chianti flasks, and left the brandy bottles for the 
last. It was the brandy bottles and a bottle shaped like a 
bear wLich had held kiimmel that IMiss Van Campen 
found. The bear-shaped bottle enraged her particularly. 
She held it up, the bear was sitting up on his haunches 
with his paw^s up, there w'as a cork in his glass head and a 
few^ sticky crystals at the bottom. I laughed. 

Tt W'as kiimmel,’ I said. ‘The best kiimmel comes 
in those bear-shaped bottles. It comes from Russia.’ 

‘Those are ail brandy bottles, aren’t they?’ Miss Van 
Campen asked. 

T can’t see them all,’ I said. ‘But they probably are.’ 

‘How long has this been going on?’ 

‘I bought them and brought them in myself,’ I said. 
‘I have had Italian officers visit me frequently and I 
have kept brandy to offer them.’ 

‘You haven’t been drinking it yourself?’ she said. 

‘I have also drunk it myself.’ 

‘Brandy,’ she said. ‘Eleven empty bottles of brandy 
and that bear liquid.’ 

‘Kiimmel.’ 

‘I will send for some one to take them away. Those 
are all the empty bottles you have?’ 

‘For the moment.’ 


153 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘And I was pitying you having jaundice. Pity is some- 
thing that is wasted on you.’ 

‘Thank you.’ 

‘I suppose you can’t be blamed for not wanting to 
go back to the front. But I should think you would 
try something more intelligent than producing jaundice 
with alcoholism.’ 

‘With what?’ 

‘With alcoholism. You heard me say it.’ I did not say 
anything. ‘Unless you find something else I’m afraid you 
will have to go back to the front when you are through 
with your jaundice. I don’t believe self-inflicted jaundice 
entitles you to a convalescent leave.’ 

‘You don’t?’ 

‘I do not.’ 

‘Have you ever had jaundice, Miss Van Campen?’ 

‘No, but I have seen a great deal of it.’ 

‘You noticed how the patients enjoyed it?’ 

‘I suppose it is better than the front.’ 

‘Miss Van Campen,’ I said, ‘did you ever know a 
man who tried to disable himself by kicking himself 
in the privates?’ 

Miss Van Campen ignored the actual question. She 
had to ignore it or leave the room. She was not ready 
to leave because she had disliked me for a long time 
and she was now cashing in. 

‘I have known many men to escape the front through 
self-inflicted wounds.’ 

‘That wasn’t the question. I have seen self-inflicted 
wounds also. I asked you if you had ever known a man 
who had tried to disable himself by kicking himself 
in the privates. Because that is the nearest sensation 
to jaundice and it is a sensation that I believe few women 

154 



A FAREWELL TO AR:\IS 


have ever experienced. That was why I asked you if 
YOU had ever had jaundice, Miss Van Campen, because 
rvliss Van Campen left the room. Later iXIiss Gage 
came in. 

‘What did you say to Van Campen? She was furious.' 

‘We were comparing sensations. I was going to sug- 
gest that she had never experienced childbirth 

‘You're a fool,’ Gage said. ‘She’s after your scalp.’ 

‘She has my scalp,’ I said. ‘She’s lost me my leave 
and she might try and get me court-martialled. She’s 
mean enough.’ 

‘She never liked you,’ Gage said. ‘What’s it about?’ 

‘She says I’ve drunk myself into jaundice so as not to 
go back to the front.’ 

‘Pooh,’ said Gage. ‘I’ll swear you’ve never taken a 
drink. Ever}^body will swear you’ve never taken a 
drink.’ 

‘She found the bottles.’ 

‘I’ve told you a hundred times to clear out those bottles. 
Where are they now?’ 

‘In the armoire.’ 

‘Have you a suitcase?’ 

‘No. Put them in that rucksack.’ 

TVliss Gage packed the bottles in the rucksack. T’ll 
give them to the porter,’ she said. She started for the 
door. 

‘Just a minute,’ Miss Van Campen said. ‘I’ll take 
those bottles.’ She had the porter with her. ‘Carry 
them, please,’ she said. ‘I want to show them to the 
doctor when I make my report.’ 

She went down the hall. The porter carried the sack. 
He knew what was in it. 

Nothing happened except that I lost my leave. 

^55 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 23 

The night I was to return to the front I sent the porter 
down to hold a seat for me on the train when it came 
from Turin. The train was to leave at midnight. It was 
made up at Turin and reached Milan about half-past 
ten at night and lay in the station until time to leave. 
You had to be there when it came in to get a seat. The 
porter took a friend with him, a machine-gunner on 
leave who worked in a tailor shop, and was sure that 
between them they could hold a place. I gave them money 
for platform tickets and had them take my baggage. 
There was a big rucksack and tw'O musettes. 

I said good-bye at the hospital at about five o’clock 
and went out. The porter had my baggage in his lodge 
and I told him I would be at the station a little before 
midnight. His wife called me ‘Signorino’ and cried. 
She wiped her eyes and shook hands and then cried 
again. I patted her on the back and she cried once 
more. She had done my mending and was a very short 
dumpy happy-faced woman with white hair. When she 
cried her whole face went to pieces. I went down to 
the corner where there was a wine shop and waited inside 
looking out the window. It was dark outside and cold 
and misty. I paid for my coffee and grappa and I watched 
the people going by in the light from the window. I 
saw Catherine and knocked on the window. She looked, 
saw me and smiled, and I went out to meet her. She 
was wearing a dark blue cape and a soft felt hat. We 
walked along together, along the sidewalk past the wine 
shops, then across the market square and up the street 

156 . 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

and through the archway to the cathedral square. There 
were street-car tracks and beyond them was the cathedral. 
It was white and wet in the mist. We crossed the tram 
tracks. On the left were the shops, their windows lighted, 
and the entrance to the galleria. There was a fog in the 
square and w^hen we came close to the front of the 
cathedral it was very big and the stone was wet. 

‘Would you like to go in?’ 

‘No,’ Catherine said. We walked along. There was 
a soldier standing with his girl in the shadow of one of 
the stone buttresses ahead of us and we passed them. 
They were standing tight up against the stone and he 
had put his cape around her. 

‘They’re like us,’ I said. 

‘Nobody is like us,’ Catherine said. She did not mean 
it happily. 

T wish they had some place to go.’ 

‘It mightn’t do them any good,’ 

‘I don’t know. Everybody ought to have some place 
to go.’ 

‘They have the cathedral,’ Catherine said. We were 
past it now. We crossed the far end of the square and 
looked back at the cathedral. It was fine in the mist. 
We were standing in front of the leather goods shop. 
There were riding boots, a rucksack and ski boots in 
the window. Each article was set apart as an exhibit; 
the rucksack in the centre, the riding boots on one side 
and the ski boots on the other. The leather was dark 
and oiled smooth as a used saddle. The electric light 
made high lights on the dull oiled leather. 

‘We’ll ski some time.’ 

‘In two months there will be ski-ing at Miirren,’ 
Catherine said. 


^57 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Let's go there/ 

‘All right/ she said. We went on past other windows 
and turned down a side street. 

TVe never been this way/ 

‘This is the way I go to the hospital/ I said. It was 
a narrow street and we kept on the right-hand side. 
There were many people passing in the fog. There 
were shops and all the windows were lighted. We looked 
in a window’ at a pile of cheeses. I stopped in front of an 
armourer's shop. 

‘Come in a minute. I have to buy a gun.' 

‘What sort of gun?’ 

‘A pistol.’ We went in and I unbuttoned my belt 
and laid it with the empty holster on the counter. Tw'o 
women were behind the counter. The women brought 
out several pistols. 

Tt must fit this/ I said, opening the holster. It was 
a grey leather holster and I had bought it second-hand 
to w’ear in the towm. 

‘Have they good pistols?’ Catherine asked. 

‘They’re all about the same. Can I try this one?’ 
I asked the woman. 

‘I have no place now to shoot/ she said. ‘But it is 
very good. You will not make a mistake with it.’ 

I snapped it and pulled back the action. The spring 
was rather strong but it worked smoothly. I sighted 
it and snapped it again. 

Tt is used/ the w^oman said. ‘It belonged to an officer 
w’ho was an excellent shot.’ 

‘Did you sell it to him?’ 

‘Yes,’ 

‘How did you get it back?’ 

‘From his orderly.’ 

158 



A FAREWELL TO AR^IS 

'Maybe yon have mine,’ I said. 'Hov; much is this:' 

'Fifty lire. It is very cheap.’ 

'All right. I want two extra clips and a box of car- 
tridges/ 

She brought them from under the counter. 

'Have you any need for a sword?’ she asked. T have 
some used swords very cheap.’ 

T’m going to the front/ I said. 

'Oh, yes, then you won’t need a sword,’ she said. 

I paid for the cartridges and the pistol, filled the 
magazine and put it in place, put the pistol in my empty 
holster, filled the extra clips with cartridges and put 
them in the leather slots on the holster and then buckled 
on my belt. The pistol felt hea\y on the belt. Still, I 
thought, it was better to have a regulation pistol. You 
could always get cartridges. 

'Xow^ we’re fully armed,’ I said. 'That was the one 
thing I had to remember to do. Some one got my other 
one going to the hospital.’ 

T hope it’s a good pistol,’ Catherine said. 

‘Was there anything else?’ the woman asked. 

‘I don’t believe so.’ 

‘The pistol has a lanyard,’ she said. 

‘So I noticed.’ The woman wanted to sell something else. 

‘You don’t need a whistle?’ 

‘I don’t believe so.’ 

The woman said good-bye and w^e went out on to the 
sidewalk. Catherine looked in the wdndowx The woman 
looked out and bowed to us. 

‘What are those little mirrors set in wood for?’ 

‘They’re for attracting birds. They twirl them out 
in the field and larks see them and come out and the 
Italians shoot them.’ 


159 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘They are an ingenious people,’ Catherine said. ‘You 
don’t shoot larks do you, darling, in America?’ 

‘Not especially.’ 

We crossed the street and started to walk up the other 
side. 

‘I feel better now,’ Catherine said. ‘I felt terrible 
when we started.’ 

‘We always feel good when we’re together.’ 

‘We always will be together.’ 

‘Yes, except that I’m going away at midnight.’ 

‘Don’t think about it, darling.’ 

We walked on up the street. The fog made the lights 
yellow. 

‘Aren’t you tired?’ Catherine asked. 

‘How about you?’ 

‘I’m all right. It’s fun to walk.’ 

‘But let’s not do it too long.’ 

‘No.’ 

We turned down a side street where there were no 
lights and walked in the street. I stopped and kissed 
Catherine. While I kissed her I felt her hand on my 
shoulder. She had pulled my cape around her so it 
covered both of us. We were standing in the street 
against a high wall. 

‘Let’s go some place,’ I said. 

‘Good,’ said Catherine. We walked on along the 
street until it came out on to a wider street that was 
beside a canal. On the other side was a brick wall and 
buildings. Ahead, down the street, I saw a street-car 
cross a bridge. 

‘We can get a cab up at the bridge,’ I said. We stood 
on the bridge in the fog waiting for a carriage. Several 
street-cars passed, full of people going home. Then 

160 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


a carriage came along but there was some one in it. The 
fog was turning to rain. 

'We could walk or take a tram/ Catherine said. 

'One will be along/ I said. ‘They go by here.’ 

'Here one comes/ she said. 

The driver stopped his horse and lowered the metal 
sign on his meter. The top of the carriage was up and 
there were drops of water on the driver’s coat. His 
varnished hat was shining in the wet. We sat back in 
the seat together and the top of the carriage made it 
dark. 

'Where did you tell him to go?’ 

'To the station. There’s a hotel across from the station 
where we can go.’ 

'We can go the way we are? Without luggage?’ 

'Yes/ I said. 

It was a long ride to the station up side streets in the 
rain. 

'Won’t we have dinner?’ Catherine asked. 'I’m afraid 
I’ll be hungry.’ 

'We’ll have it in our room.’ 

‘I haven’t anything to wear. I haven’t even a night- 
gown.’ 

'We’ll get one/ I said and called to the driver, 

'Go to the Via Manzoni and up that.’ He nodded 
and turned off to the left at the next comer. On the 
big street Catherine watched for a shop. 

‘Here’s a place/ she said, I stopped the driver and 
Catherine got out, walked across the sidewalk and w^ent 
inside. I sat back in the carriage and waited for her. 
It was raining and I could smell the wet street and the 
horse steaming in the rain. She came back with a package 
and got in and we drove on. 

L i6i 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T was very extravagant, darling,’ she said, ‘but it’s a 
fine nightgown.’ 

At the hotel I asked Catherine to wait in the carriage 
while I went in and spoke to the manager. There were 
plenty of rooms. Then I went out to the carriage, paid 
the driver, and Catherine and I walked in together. 
The small boy in buttons carried the package. The 
manager bowed us toward the elevator. There was 
much red plush and brass. The manager went up in the 
elevator with us. 

‘Monsieur and Madame wish dinner in their room?’ 

‘Yes. Will you have the menu brought up?’ I said. 

‘You wish something special for dinner. Some game 
or a souffle?’ 

The elevator passed three floors with a click each time, 
then clicked and stopped. 

‘What have you as game?’ 

‘I could get a pheasant, or a woodcock.’ 

‘A woodcock,’ I said. We walked down the corridor. 
The carpet was worn. There were many doors. The 
manager stopped and unlocked a door and opened it. 

‘Here you are. A lovely room.’ 

The small boy in buttons put the package on the table 
in the centre of the room. The manager opened the 
curtains. 

‘It is foggy outside,’ he said. The room was fur- 
nished in red plush. There were many mirrors, two 
chairs and a large bed with a satin coverlet. A door led 
to the bathroom. 

‘I will send up the menu,’ the manager said. He bowed 
and went out. 

I went to the window and looked out, then pulled a 
cord that shut the thick plush curtains. Catherine was 

162 



A FAREWELL TO AR.WS 

on the bed locLinj^ at tl^e cut chandelier. 

She had taken her hat off and her hair shone under the 
light. She saw herself in one of the mirrors and put 
tier hands to her hair. I saw her in three other mirrors. 
She did not look happy. She let her cape fall on the bed, 

"What's the matter, darling?’ 

"I never felt like a whore before/ she said. I went 
over to the window and pulled the curtain aside and 
looked out. I had not thought it would be like this. 

"You’re not a whore.’ 

T know it, darling. But it isn’t nice to feel like one.’ 
Her voice was dry and flat. 

"This was the best hotel we could get in,’ I said. I 
looked out the window. Across the square were the 
lights of the station. There were carriages going by 
on the street and I saw the trees in the park. The lights 
from the hotel shone on the wet pavement. Oh, hell, 
I thought, do we have to argue now? 

"Come over here, please,’ Catherine said. The flatness 
was all gone out of her voice. "Come over, please. Fm 
a good girl again.’ I looked over at the bed. She was 
smiling. 

I went over and sat on the bed beside her and kissed 
her. 

"You’re my good girl.’ 

"I’m certainly yours,’ she said. 

After we had eaten we felt fine, and then after, we 
felt verj" happy and in a little time the room felt like 
our own home. My room at the hospital had been our 
own home and this room was our home too in the same 
way. 

Catherine wore my tunic over her shoulders while 
we ate. We were very hungr)'' and the meal was good 

163 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


and we drank a bottle of capri and a bottle of St. Estephe. 
I drank most of it but Catherine drank some and it 
made her feel splendid. For dinner we had a woodcock 
with souffie potatoes and puree de marron, a salad and 
sbaglioni for dessert. 

Tt’s a fine room,’ Catherine said. Tt’s a lovely room. 
We should have stayed here all the time we’ve been in 
^lilan.’ 

‘It’s a funny room. But it’s nice.’ 

‘Vice is a wonderful thing,’ Catherine said. ‘The 
people who go in for it seem to have good taste about 
it. The red plush is really fine. It’s just the thing. And 
the mirrors are very attractive.’ 

‘You’re a lovely girl.’ 

‘I don’t know how a room like this would be for 
waking up in the morning. But it’s really a splendid 
room.’ I poured another glass of St. Estephe. 

‘I wish we could do something really sinful,’ Catherine 
said. ‘Everything we do seems so innocent and simple. 
I can’t believe we do anything wrong.’ 

‘You’re a grand girl.’ 

‘I only feel hungry. I get terribly hungry.’ 

‘You’re a fine simple girl,’ I said. 

‘I am a simple girl. No one ever understood it except 
you.’ 

‘Once when I first met you I spent an afternoon 
thinking how we would go to the Hotel Cavour together 
and how it would be.’ 

‘That was awfully cheeky of you. This isn’t the 
Cavour is it?’ 

‘No. They wouldn’t have taken us in there.’ 

‘They’ll take us in some time. But that’s how we 
differ, darling. I never thought about anything.’ 

164 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'Didn’t yon ever at all?' 

*A litticj’ she said. 

‘Oil yoiiVe a loveh’ girl.' 

I poured another glass of vine. 

Tm a ver}^ simple girl,' Catherine said. 

T didn't think so at first. I thought vou were a crazy 
girld 

T was a little crazy. But I wasn’t crazy in any com- 
plicated manner. I didn’t confuse you did I, darling?’ 

'Wine is a grand thing,’ I said. ‘It makes you forget 
all the bad.’ 

Tt’s lovely/ said Catherine. ‘But it’s given my father 
gout very badly.’ 

‘Have you a father?’ 

‘Yes,’ said Catherine. ‘He has gout. You won’t ever 
have to meet him. Haven’t you a father?’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘A step-father.’ 

‘Will I like him?’ 

‘You won’t have to meet him.’ 

‘We have such a fine time/ Catherine said. ‘I don’t 
take any interest in anything else any more. I’m so 
very happy married to you.’ 

The waiter came and took away the things. After a 
while we were very still and w'e could hear the rain. 
Down below" on the street a motor car honked. 

‘ “And always at my back I hear 

Time’s winged chariot hurrying near,” ’ 

I said. 

‘I know that poem/ Catherine said. ‘It’s by Marvell. 
But it’s about a girl wLo wouldn’t live with a man.’ 

My head felt very clear and cold and I wanted to talk 
facts. 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Where will you have the baby?’ 

‘I don’t know. The best place I can fin d,’ 

‘How will you arrange it?’ 

‘The best way I can. Don’t worry, darling. We may 
have several babies before the war is over.’ 

‘It’s nearly time to go.’ 

‘I linow. You can make it time if you want.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Then don’t worry, darling. You were fine until now 
and now you are worrying.’ 

‘I won’t. How often will you write?’ 

‘Every day. Do they read your letters?’ 

They can’t read English enough to hurt any.’ 

‘I’ll make them very confusing,’ Catherine said. 

‘But not too confusing.’ 

‘I’ll just make them a little confusing.’ 

‘I’m afraid we have to start to go.’ 

‘All right, darling.’ 

‘I hate to leave our fine house.’ 

‘So do I.’ 

‘But we have to go.’ 

‘All right. But we’re never settled in our home verv 
long.’ 

‘We will be.’ 

‘I’ll have a fine home for you when you come back.’ 
‘Maybe I’ll be back right away.’ 

‘Perhaps you’ll be hurt just a little in the foot.’ 

‘Or the lobe of the ear.’ 

‘No. I want your ears the way they are.’ 

‘And not my feet?’ 

‘Your feet have been hit already.’ 

‘We have to go, darling. Really.’ 

‘All right. You go first.’ 


i66 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 24 


We walked down the stairs instead of taking the elevator* 
The carpet on the stairs was worn. I had paid for the 
dinner when it came up and the waiter, wLo had brought 
it, was sitting on a chair near the door. He jumped up 
and bowed and I went with him into the side room and 
paid the bill for the room. The manager had remem- 
bered me as a friend and refused payment in advance 
but when he retired he had remembered to have the 
waiter stationed at the door so that I should not get 
out without paying. I suppose that had happened; 
even with his friends. One had so many friends in a 
war. 

I asked the waiter to get us a carriage and he took 
Catherine’s package that I was carrjdng and went out 
with an umbrella. Outside through the window we 
saw^ him crossing the street in the rain. We stood in 
the side room and looked out the window. 

‘How do you feel, Cat?’ 

‘Sleepy.’ 

‘I feel hollow and hungry.’ 

‘Have you anything to eat?’ 

‘Yes, in my musette.’ 

I saw the carriage coming. It stopped, the horse’s 
head hanging in the rain, and the waiter stepped out, 
opened his umbrella, and came tow^ard the hotel. We 
met him at the door and walked out under the umbrella 
down the wet walk to the carriage at the curb. Water 
was running in the gutter. 

‘There is your package on the seat,’ the waiter said. 

167 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

He stood with the umbrella until we were in and I had 
tipped him. 

‘Many thanks. Pleasant journey,’ he said. The 
coachman lifted the reins and the horse started. The 
waiter turned away under the umbrella and wnnt to- 
ward the hotel. We drove down the street and turned 
to the left, then came around to the right in front of 
the station. There wxre two carabiniere standing under 
the light just out of the rain. The light shone on their 
hats. The rain fell clear and transparent against the 
light from the station. A porter came out from under the 
shelter of the station, his shoulders up against the rain. 

‘No,’ I said. ‘Thanks. I don’t need thee.’ 

He went back under the shelter of the archway. I 
turned to Catherine. Her face was in the shadow from 
the hood of the carriage. 

‘We might as well say good-bye.’ 

‘I can't go in?’ 

‘Xo.’ 

‘Good-bye, Cat.’ 

‘Will you tell him the hospital?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

I told the driver the address to drive to. He nodded. 

‘Good-bye,’ I said. ‘Take good care of yourself and 
young Catherine.’ 

‘Good-bye, darling.’ 

‘Good-bye,’ I said. I stepped out into the rain and 
the carriage started. Catherine leaned out and I saw 
her face in the light. She smiled and waved. The 
carriage went up the street, Catherine pointed in to- 
ward the archway. I looked, there were only the two 
carabiniere and the archway. I realized she meant for 
me to get in out of the rain. I went in and stood and 

i68 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


watched the carriage turn the corner. Then I started 
through the station and down the runway to the train. 

The porter was on the platform looking for me. I 
followed him into the train crow^ding past people and 
along the aisle and in through a door to where the 
machine-gunner sat in the corner of a full compart- 
ment. Aly rucksack and musettes w^ere above his head 
on the luggage rack. There were many men standing 
in the corridor and the men in the compartment all 
looked at us when we came in. There were not enough 
places in the train and every one wzs hostile. The machine- 
gunner stood up for me to sit down. Some one tapped 
me on the shoulder. I looked around. It was a very 
tall gaunt captain of zrtillery with a red scar along his 
jaw. He had looked through the glass on the corridor 
and then come in. 

‘What do you say?’ I asked. I had turned and faced 
him. He w’as taller than me and his face was very thin 
under the shadow of his cap-visor and the scar was new 
and shiny. Every one in the compartment was looking 
at me. 

‘You can’t do that,’ he said. ‘You can’t have a soldier 
save you a place,’ 

‘I have done it.’ 

He swallowed and I saw his Adam’s apple go up 
and then down. The machine-gunner stood in front of 
the place. Other men looked in through the glass. No 
one in the compartment said anything. 

‘You have no right to do that. I was here two hours 
before you came.’ 

‘What do you want?’ 

‘The seat.’ 

‘So do L’ 


169 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I watched his face and could feel the whole com- 
partment against me. I did not blame them. He was 
in the right. But I wanted the seat. Still no one said 
anjthing. 

bh, hell, I thought. 

‘Sit dowTi, Signor Capitano,’ I said. The machine- 
guimer moved out of the way and the tall captain sat 
down. He looked at me. His face seemed hurt. ‘ But 
he had the seat. ‘Get my things,’ I said to the machine- 
gunner. We went out in the corridor. The train was 
full and I knew there was no chance of a place. I gave 
the porter and the machine-gunner ten lire apiece. They 
went down the corridor and outside on the platform 
looking in the -windows but there were no places. 

‘Maybe some will get off at Brescia,’ the porter said. 

‘More will get on at Brescia,’ said the machine- 
guimer. I said good-bye to them and we shook hands 
and they left. They both felt badly. Inside the train 
we were all standing in the corridor when the train 
started. I watched the lights of the station and the 
yards as we went out. It was still raining and soon the 
windows were wet and you could not see out. Later 
I slept on the floor of the corridor; first putting my 
pocket-book with my money and papers in it inside my 
shirt and trousers so that it was inside the leg of my 
breeches. I slept all night, waking at Brescia and 
Verona wLen more men got on the train, but going back 
to sleep at once. I had my head on one of the musettes 
and my arms around the other and I could feel the 
pack and they could all walk over me if they wouldn’t 
step on me. Men w^ere sleeping on the floor all down the 
corridor. Others stood holding on to the window rods or 
leaning against the doors. That train was always crowded. 

170 



BOOK III 




CHAPTER 25 


Xow in the fall the trees were all bare and the roads 
were muddy. I rode to Gorizia from Udine on a 
camion. We passed other camions on the road and I 
looked at the countr^u The mulberry trees were bare 
and the fields were browm. There were wet dead leaves 
on the road from the rows of bare trees and men were 
working on the road, tamping stone in the nits from 
piles of crushed stone along the side of the road be- 
tween the trees. We saw the town with a mist over it 
that cut off the mountains. We crossed the river and I 
saw that it was running high. It had been raining in the 
mountains. We came into the town past the factories and 
then the houses and villas and I saw that many more 
houses had been hit. On a narrow street w^e passed a 
British Red Cross ambulance. The driver wore a cap 
and his face was thin and very tanned. I did not know 
him. I got down from the camion in the big square in 
front of the Town iXIajor's house, the driver handed down 
my rucksack and I put it on and swung on the two musettes 
and walked to our villa. It did not feel like a home-coming. 

I walked down the damp gravel driveway looking 
at the villa through the trees. The windows were all 
shut but the door was open. I went in and found the 
major sitting at a table in the bare room with maps and 
typed sheets of paper on the wall. 

‘Hello,’ he said. ‘How are you?’ He looked older 
and drier. 

173 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T’m good,’ I said. ‘How is ever3'thing?’ 

‘It’s all over,’ he said. ‘Take off j^our kit and sit 
down.’ I put my pack and the two musettes on the 
floor and my cap on the pack. I brought the other chair 
over from the wall and sat down by the desk. 

‘It’s been a bad summer,’ the major said. ‘Are you 
strong now?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Did you ever get the decorations?’ 

‘Yes. I got them fine. Thank j'^ou very much.’ 

‘Let’s see them.’ 

I opened my cape so he could see the two ribbons. 

‘Did you get the boxes with the medals?’ 

‘No. Just the papers.’ 

‘The boxes will come later. That takes more time.’ 

‘What do you want me to do?’ 

‘The cars are all away. There are six up north at 
Caporetto. You know’ Caporetto?’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. I remembered it as a little white towm 
with a campanile in a valley. It W’as a clean little town 
and there was a fine fountain in the square. 

They are working from there. There are many sick 
now. The fighting is over.’ 

‘Where are the others?’ 


There are two up in the mountains and four still 
on the Bainsizza. The other two ambulance sections 
are in the Carso with the third army.’ 

‘What do you wish me to do?’ 


‘You can go and take over the four cars on the 
Bainsizza if you like. Gino has been up there a long 
time. You haven’t seen it up there, have vou?’ 

‘No.’ ^ ■ 


‘It was very bad. We lost three cars.’ 


174 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T heard about it.’ 

'Yes, Rinaldi wrote you.’ 

'Where is Rinaldi?’ 

'He is here at the hospital. He has had a summer 

and fall of it.’ 

T believe it.’ 

Tt has been bad,’ the major said. 'You couldn’t 
believe how bad it’s been. I’ve often thought you were 
lucky to be hit when you were.’ 

T know I was.’ 

'Next year will be worse,’ the major said. 'Perhaps 
they will attack now. They say they are to attack 
but I can’t believe it. It is too late. You saw the 
river?’ 

‘Yes. It’s high already.’ 

T don’t believe they will attack now^ that the rains 
have started. We will have the snow" soon. What about 
your countJW'men? Will there be other Americans besides 
yourself?’ 

'They are training an army of ten million.’ 

'I hope w^e get some of them. But the French will 
hog them all. We’ll never get any dow'n here. All right. 
You stay here to-night and go out to-morrow’ with the 
little car and send Gino back. I’ll send somebody with 
you that know^s the road. Gino will tell you everjlhing. 
They are shelling quite a little still but it is all over. 
You will w’ant to see the Bainsizza.’ 

T’m glad to see it. I am glad to be back with you again, 
Signor Maggiore.’ 

He smiled. 'You are very good to say so. I am veiy^ 
tired of this w"ar. If I w’as away I do not believe I would 
come back.’ 

'Is it so bad?’ 

W5 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Yes. It is so bad and worse. Go get cleaned up 
and find your friend Rinaldi.’ 

I went out and carried my bags up the stairs. Rinaldi 
was not in the room but his things were there and I 
sat down on the bed and unwrapped my puttees and took 
tiie shoe off my right foot. Then I lay back on the bed. 
I was tired and my right foot hurt. It seemed silly to 
lie on the bed with one shoe off, so I sat up and un- 
laced the other shoe and dropped it on the floor, then 
lay back on the blanket again. The room was stuffy 
with the window closed but I was too tired to get up 
and open it. I saw my things were all in one corner of 
the room. Outside it was getting dark. I lay on the 
bed and thought about Catherine and waited for Rinaldi. 
I was going to try not to think about Catherine except 
at night before I went to sleep. But now I was tired 
and there was nothing to do, so I lay and thought about 
her. I was thinking about her when Rinaldi came in. 
He looked just the same. Perhaps he was a little thinner. 

‘Well, baby,’ he said. I sat up on the bed. He came 
over, sat down and put his arm around me. ‘Good old 
baby.’ He whacked me on the back and I held both 
his arms. 

‘Old baby,’ he said. ‘Let me see your knee.’ 

‘I’ll have to take off my breeches.’ 

‘Take off your breeches, baby. We’re all friends here. 
I want to see what kind of a job they did.’ I stood up, 
took off the breeches and pulled off the knee-brace. 
Rinaldi sat on the floor and bent the knee gently back 
and forth. He ran his finger along the scar; put his 
thumbs together over the kneecap and rocked the knee 
gently with his fingers. 

‘Is that all the articulation you have?’ 

176 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Yes.' 

‘It's a crime to send you back. They ought to get 
complete articulation.’ 

‘It's a lot better than it was. It was stiff as a board.’ 

Rinaldi bent it more. I watched his hands. He had 
fine surgeon’s hands. I looked at the top of his head, 
his hair shiny and parted smoothly. He bent the knee 
too far. 

‘Ouch!’ I said. 

‘You ought to have more treatment on it with the 
machines,’ Rinaldi said. 

‘It’s better than it was.’ 

‘I see that, baby. This is something I know more 
about than you.’ He stood up and sat down on the 
bed. ‘The knee itself is a good job.’ He was through 
with the knee. ‘Tell me all about everything.’ 

‘There’s nothing to tell,’ I said. ‘I’ve led a quiet life.’ 

‘You act like a married man,’ he said. ‘What’s the matter 
with you?’ 

‘Nothing,’ I said. ‘What’s the matter with you?’ 

‘This war is killing me,’ Rinaldi said, ‘I am very 
depressed bv it.’ He folded his hands over his knee. 

‘Oh,’ I said. 

‘W hat’s the matter? Can’t I even have human impulses?’ 

‘No. I can see you’ve been having a fine time. Tell 
me.’ 

‘All summer and all fall I’ve operated. I work all 
the time. I do everybody’s work. All the hard ones 
they leave to me. By God, baby, I am becoming a lovely 
surgeon.’ 

‘That sounds better.’ 

‘I never think. No, by God, I don’t think ; I operate.’ 

‘That’s right.’ 

M 


177 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘But now, baby, it’s all over. I don’t operate now 
and I feel like hell. This is a terrible war, baby. You 
believe me when I say it. Now you cheer me up. Did 
you bring the phonograph records?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

They were wrapped in paper in a cardboard box in 
my rucksack. I was too tired to get them out. 

‘Don’t y'ou feel good yourself, baby?’ 

‘I feel like hell.’ 

‘This war is terrible,’ Rinaldi said. ‘Come on. We’ll 
both get drunk and be cheerful. Then we’ll go get the 
ashes dragged. Then we’ll feel fine.’ 

‘I’ve had the jaundice,’ I said, ‘and I can’t get drunk.’ 

‘Oh, baby, how you’ve come back to me. You come 
back serious and with a liver. I tell you this war is a 
bad thing. Why did we make it anyway?’ 

‘We’ll have a drink. I don’t want to get drunk but 
we’ll have a drink.’ 

Rinaldi went across the room to the washstand and 
brought back two glasses and a bottle of cognac. 

‘It’s Austrian cognac,’ he said. ‘Seven stars, It’s all 
they captured on San Gabriele.’ 

‘Were you up there?’ 

‘No. I haven’t been anywhere. I’ve been here all 
the time operating. Look, baby, that is your old tooth- 
brushing glass. I kept it all the time to remind me of 
you.’ 

‘To remind you to brush your teeth.’ 

‘No. I have my own too. I kept this to remind me 
of you trying to brush away the Villa Rossa from your 
teeth in the morning, swearing and eating aspirin and 
cursing harlots. Every time I see that glass I think 
of you trying to clean your conscience with a toothbrush.’ 

178 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


He came over to the bed. ‘Kiss me once and tell me 
you’re not serious.’ 

‘I never kiss you. You’re an ape.’ 

‘I know, you are the fine good Anglo-Saxon boy. I 
know. You are the remorse boy, I know. I will wait 
till I see the Anglo-Saxon brushing away harlotry with 
a toothbrush.’ 

‘Put some cognac in the glass.’ 

We touched glasses and drank. Rinaldi laughed at 
me. 

‘I will get you drunk and take out your liver and put 
you in a good Italian liver and make you a man again.’ 

I held the glass for some more cognac. It was dark 
outside now. Holding the glass of cognac, I went over 
and opened the window. The rain had stopped falling. 
It wus colder outside and there was a mist in the trees. 

‘Don’t throw the cognac out the window,’ Rinaldi 
said. ‘If you can’t drink it give it to me.’ 

‘Go and drown yourself,’ I said. I was glad to see 
Rinaldi again. He had spent two years teasing me and 
I had always liked it. We understood each other very 
well. 

‘Are you married?’ he asked from the bed. I w'as 
standing against the wall by the window. 

‘Not yet.’ 

‘Are YOU in love?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘With that English girl?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Poor baby. Is she good to you?’ 

‘Of course.’ 

‘I mean is she good to you practically speaking?’ 

‘Shut up.’ 

179 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T will. You will see I am a man of extreme delicacy. 
Does she - ?’ 

‘Rinin,’ I said, ‘please shut up. If you want to be my 
friend shut up.’ 

‘I don’t loant to be your friend, baby. I am your 
friend.’ 

‘Then shut up.’ 

‘All right.’ 

I went over to the bed and sat down beside Rinaldi. 
He was holding his glass and looking at the floor. 

‘You see how it is, Rinin?’ 

‘Oh, yes. All my life I encounter sacred subjects. 
But very few with you. I suppose you must have them 
too.’ He looked at the floor. 

‘You haven’t any?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘Not any?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘I can say this about your mother and that about your 
sister?’ 

‘And that about your sister,’ Rinaldi said swiftly. We 
both laughed. 

‘The old superman,’ I said. 

‘I am jealous maybe,’ Rinaldi said. 

‘No, you’re not.’ 

‘I don’t mean like that. I mean something else. Have 
you any married friends?’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. 

‘I haven’t,’ Rinaldi said. ‘Not if they love each other.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘They don’t like me.’ 

‘Why not?’ 

‘I am the snake. I am the snake of reason.’ 

i8o 



A FAREWELL TO AR3.IS 


WouVe ^!:£etting it mixed. The apple was reason.’ 

'Xo, it was the snake.’ He was more cheerful. 

'You are better when you don’t think so deeply/ I 

said. 

T love you, baby,’ he said. ‘You puncture me when 
I become a great Italian thinker. But I know many 
tilings I can’t say. I know more than you.’ 

'Yes. You do.’ 

‘But you will have a better time. Even with remorse 
you will have a better time.’ 

T don’t think so.’ 

‘Oh, yes. That is true. Already I am only happy 
when I am working.’ He looked at the floor again. 

‘You’ll get over that.’ 

‘Xo. I only like two other things; one is bad for my 
work and the other is over in half an hour or fifteen 
minutes. Sometimes less.’ 

‘Sometimes a good deal less.’ 

‘Perhaps I have improved, baby. You do not know. 
But there are only the two things and my work.’ 

‘You’ll get other things.’ 

‘Xo. We never get argvthing. We are born with all 
we have and we never learn. We never get anjthing 
new. We all start complete. You should be glad not 
to be a Latin.’ 

‘There’s no such thing as a Latin. That is “Latin” 
thinking. You are so proud of your defects.’ Rinaldi 
looked up and laughed. 

‘We’ll stop, baby. I am tired from thinking so much.’ 
He had looked tired wEen he came in. Tt’s nearly time 
to eat. I’m glad you’re back. You are my best friend 
and my war brother.’ 

‘When do the war brothers eat?’ I asked. 

i8i 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Right away. We’ll drink once naore for your liver’s 
sake.’ 

‘Like Saint Paul.’ 

‘You are inaccurate. That was wine and the stomach. 
Take a little wine for your stomach’s sake.’ 

‘Whatever you have in the bottle,’ I said. ‘For any 
sake you mention.’ 

‘To your girl,’ Rinaldi said. He held out his glass. 

‘All right.’ 

‘I’ll never say a dirty thing about her.’ 

‘Don’t strain yourself.’ 

He drank off the cognac. ‘I am pure,’ he said. ‘I am 
like you, baby. I will get an English girl too. As a matter 
of fact I knew your girl first but she was a little tall for 
me. A tall girl for a sister,’ he quoted. 

‘You have a lovely pure mind,’ I said. 

‘Haven’t I? That’s why they call me Rinaldo 
Purissimo.’ 

‘Rinaldo Sporchissimo.’ 

‘Come on, baby, we’ll go down to eat while my mind 
is still pure.’ 

I washed, combed my hair and we went down the 
stairs. Rinaldi was a little drunk. In the room where 
we ate, the meal was not quite ready. 

‘I’ll go get the bottle,’ Rinaldi said. He went off 
up the stairs. I sat at the table and he came back with 
the bottle and poured us each a half tumbler of cognac. 

‘Too much,’ I said and held up the glass and sighted 
at the lamp on the table. 

‘Not for an empty stomach. It is a wonderful thing. 
It bums out the stomach completely. Nothing is worse 
for you.’ 

‘All right.’ 


182 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Seif-destruction day by day/ Rinaldi said. Tt mins 
the stomacli and makes the hand shake. Just the thing 

for a surgeon.’ 

'You recommend it?’ 

'Heartily. I use no other. Drink it down, baby, and 
look forward to being sick.’ 

I drank half the glass. In the hall I could hear the 
orderly calling, 'Soup! Soup is ready!’ 

The major came in, nodded to us and sat down. He 
seemed very small at table. 

Ts this all we are?’ he asked. The orderly put the 
soup bowl down and he ladled out a plateful. 

'We are all,’ Rinaldi said. 'Unless the priest comes. 
If he knew Federico was here he would be here.’ 

'Where is he?’ I asked. 

'He’s at 307,’ the major said. He was busy with his 
soup. He wiped his mouth, wiping his upturned grey 
moustache carefully. ‘He will come I think. I called 
them and left word to tell him you were here.’ 

'I miss the noise of the mess,’ I said. 

'Yes, it’s quiet,’ the major said. 

T will be noisy,’ said Rinaldi. 

'Drink some wine, Enrico,’ said the major. He filled 
my glass. The spaghetti came in and we were ail busy. 
We were finishing the spaghetti when the priest came 
in. He was the same as ever, small and brown and com- 
pact-looking. I stood up and w^e shook hands. He put 
his hand on my shoulder. 

T came as soon as I heard,’ he said. 

'Sit down,’ the major said. 'You’re late.’ 

'Good evening, priest,’ Rinaldi said, using the English 
word. They had taken that up from the priest-baiting 
captain who spoke a little English, 'Good evening, 

183 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Rinaldi,’ the priest said. The orderly brought him 
soup but he said he would start with the spaghetti. 

‘How are you?’ he asked me. 

‘Fine,’ I said. ‘How have things been?’ 

‘Drink some wine, priest,’ Rinaldi said. ‘Take a little 
wine for your stomach’s sake. That’s Saint Paul, you 
know.’ 

‘Yes I know,’ said the priest politely. Rinaldi filled 
his glass. 

‘That Saint Paul,’ said Rinaldi. ‘He’s the one who 
makes all the trouble.’ The priest looked at me and 
smiled. I could see that the baiting did not touch him 
now. 

‘That Saint Paul,’ Rinaldi said. ‘He was a rounder 
and a chaser and then when he was no longer hot he 
said it was no good. When he w'as finished he made 
the rules for us who are still hot. Isn’t it true, Federico?’ 

The major smiled. We were eating meat stew now. 

‘I never discuss a Saint after dark,’ I said. The priest 
looked up from the stew and smiled at me. 

‘There he is, gone over with the priest,’ Rinaldi said. 
‘Where are all the good old priest-baiters? Where is 
Cavalcanti? Where is Brundi? Where is Cesare? Do 
I have to bait this priest alone without support?’ 

‘He is a good priest,’ said the major. 

‘He is a good priest,’ said Rinaldi. ‘But still a priest. 
I tr)- to make the mess like the old days. I want to make 
Federico happy. To hell with you, priest!’ 

I saw the major look at him and notice that he was 
drunk. His thin face was white. The line of his hair 
was verj^ black against the white of his forehead. 

‘It’s all right, Rinaldo,’ said the priest. ‘It’s all 
right.’ 


184 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'To hell with you/ said Rinaldi. ‘To hell with the 
whole damn business.' He sat back in his chair. 

‘He’s been under a strain and he’s tired/ the major 
said to me. He finished his meat and wiped up the 
gravy with a piece of bread. 

T don’t give a damn/ Pvinaldi said to the table. ‘To 
hell with the whole business.’ He looked defiantly 
around the table, his eyes flat, his face pale. 

‘All right,’ I said. ‘To hell wdth the whole damn 
business.’ 

‘No, no,’ said Rinaldi. ‘You can’t do it. A'ou can’t 
do it. I say you can’t do it. You’re dry and you’re 
empty and there’s nothing else. There’s nothing else I 
tell you. Not a damned thing. I know, whon I stop 
working.’ 

The priest shook his head. The orderly took away 
the stew dish. 

‘What are you eating meat for?’ Rinaldi turned to the 
priest. ‘Don’t you know- it’s Friday?’ 

‘It’s Thursday,’ the priest said. 

‘It’s a lie. It’s Friday. You’re eating the body of 
our Lord. It’s God-meat. I loiow. It’s dead Austrian. 
That’s what you’re eating.’ 

'The white meat is from officers,’ I said, completing 
the old joke. 

Rinaldi laughed. He filled his glass. 

‘Don’t mind me,’ he said. ‘I’m just a little crazy.’ 

‘You ought to have a leave/ the priest said. 

The major shook his head at him. Rinaldi looked at 
the priest. 

‘You think I ought to have a leave?’ 

The major shook his head at the priest. Rinaldi was 
looking at the priest. 

185 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Just as you like,’ the priest said. ‘Not if you don’t want.’ 

‘To hell with you,’ Rinaldi said. ‘They try to get 
rid of me. Every night they try to get rid of me. I fight 
them off. WTiat if I have it. Everybody has it. The 
whole world’s got it. First,’ he went on, assuming the 
manner of a lecturer, ‘it’s a little pimple. Then we 
notice a rash between the shoulders. Then we notice 
nothing at all. We put our faith in mercury.’ 

‘Or salvarsan,’ the major interrupted quietly. 

‘A mercurial product,’ Rinaldi said. He acted very 
elated now. ‘I know something worth two of that. 
Good old priest,’ he said. ‘You’ll never get it. Baby 
will get it. It’s an industrial accident. It’s a simple 
industrial accident.’ 

The orderly brought in the sweet and coffee. The 
sweet was a sort of black bread pudding with hard sauce. 
The lamp was smoking; the black smoke going close up 
inside the chimney. 

‘Bring two candles and take away the lamp,’ the major 
said. The orderly brought two lighted candles each 
in a saucer, and took out the lamp blowing it out. Rinaldi 
was quiet now. He seemed all right. We talked and 
after the coffee we all went out into the hall. 

‘You want to talk to the priest. I have to go in the 
town,’ Rinaldi said. ‘Good-night, priest.’ 

‘Good-night, Rinaldo,’ the priest said. 

‘I’ll see you, Fredi,’ Rinaldi said. 

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘Come in early.’ He made a face and 
went out the door. The major was standing with us. 
‘He’s very tired and overworked,’ he said. ‘He thinks 
too he has syphilis. I don’t believe it but he may have. 
He is treating himself for it. Good-night. You will 
leave before daylight, Enrico?’ 

i86 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


"^Good-bye then/ he said. ^Good luck. Peduzzi will 
wake you and go with you,’ 

* Good-bye, Signor Maggiore.’ 

* Good-bye. They talk about an Austrian offensive 
but I don’t believe it, I hope not. But anyway it won’t 
be here. Gino will tell you everything. The telephone 
works well now.’ 

T’ll call regularly.’ 

‘Please do. Good night. Don’t let Rinaldi drink so 
much brandy,’ 

T’ll try not to.’ 

‘Good-night, priest.’ 

‘Good-night, Signor Maggiore.’ 

He went off into his office. 


CHAPTER 26 

I WENT to the door and looked out. It had stopped 
raining but there was a mist. 

‘Should we go upstairs?’ I asked the priest. 

T can only stay a little while.’ 

‘Come on up.’ 

We climbed the stairs and went into my room. I lay 
dovm on Rinaldi’s bed. The priest sat on my cot that 
the orderly had set up. It was dark in the room. 

‘Well,’ he said, ‘how are you really?’ 

T’m all right. I’m tired to-night.’ 

T’m tired too, but from no cause.’ 

‘What about the war?’ 


187 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T think it will be over soon. I don’t know why, but 
I feel it.’ 

‘How do you feel it?’ 

‘You know how your major is? Gentle? Many people 
are like that now.’ 

‘I feel that way myself,’ I said. 

‘It has been a terrible summer,’ said the priest. He 
was surer of himself now than when I had gone away. 
‘You cannot believe how it has been. Except that you 
have been there and you know how it can be. Many 
people have realized the war this summer. Officers 
whom I thought could never realize it realize it 
now.’ 

‘What will happen?’ I stroked the blanket with my 
hand. 

‘I do not know but I do not think it can go on much 
longer.’ 

‘What will happen?’ 

‘Thev will stop fighting.’ 

‘Who?’ 

‘Both sides.’ 

‘I hope so,’ I said. 

‘You don’t believe it?’ 

‘I don’t believe both sides will stop fighting at once.’ 

‘I suppose not. It is too much to expect. But when 
I see the changes in men I do not think it can go on.’ 

‘Who won the fighting this summer?’ 

‘No one.’ 

‘The Austrians w'on,’ I said. ‘They kept them from 
taking San Gabriele. They’ve won. They won’t stop 
fighting.’ 

If they feel as we feel they may stop. They have 
gone through the same thing.’ 

i88 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


"So one ever stopped when they were winning/ 

'You discourage me/ 

T can only say what I think/ 

'Then you think it will go on and on? Nothing will 
ever happen?* 

T don’t know. I only think the Austrians will not 
stop when they have won a victory. It is in defeat that 
we become Christian/ 

'The Austrians are Christians except for the Bos- 
nians/ 

T don’t mean technically Christian. I mean like Our 
Lord/ 

He said nothing. 

'We are all gentler now because we are beaten. How 
would Our Lord have been if Peter had rescued Him in 
the Garden?’ 

‘He would have been just the same.’ 

‘I don’t think so,’ I said. 

‘Y'ou discourage me,’ he said. T believe and I pray 
that something will happen. I have felt it very close.’ 

‘Something may happen,’ I said. ‘But it will happen 
only to us. If they felt the way w'e do, it would be all 
right. But they have beaten us. They feel another 
way.’ 

‘Alany of the soldiers have always felt this way. It 
is not because they were beaten.’ 

‘They were beaten to start with. They were beaten 
when they took them from their farms and put them 
in the army. That is why the peasant has wisdom, be- 
cause he is defeated from the start. Put him in power 
and see how wise he is.’ 

He did not say anything. He was thinking. 

‘Now I am depressed myself,’ I said. ‘That’s why 

189 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


I never think about these things. I never think and 
yet when I begin to talk I say the things I have found 
out in my mind without thinking.’ 

T had hoped for something.’ 

‘Defeat?’ 

‘No. Something more.’ 

‘There isn’t anything more. Except victory. It may 
be worse.’ 

‘I hoped for a long time for victory.’ 

‘Me too.’ 

‘Now I don’t know.’ 

‘It has to be one or the other.’ 

‘I don’t believe in victory any more.’ 

‘I don’t. But I don’t believe in defeat. Though it 
may be better.’ 

‘Wliat do you believe in?’ 

‘In sleep,’ I said. He stood up. 

‘I am very sorry to have stayed so long. But I like 
so to talk with you.’ 

‘It is very nice to talk again. I said that about sleeping, 
meaning nothing.’ 

We stood up and shook hands in the dark. 

‘I sleep at 307 now,’ he said. 

‘I go out on post early to-morrow.’ 

‘I’ll see you when you come back.’ 

‘We’ll have a walk and talk together.’ I walked with 
him to the door. 

Don’t go down,’ he said. ‘It is very nice that you 
are back. Though not so nice for you.’ He put his hand 
on my shoulder. 

‘It’s all right for me,’ I said. ‘Good-night.’ 

‘Good-night. Ciaou!’ 

‘Ciaou!’ I said. I was deadly sleepy. 

190 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


CHAPTER 27 

I WOKE when Rinaldi came in but he did not talk and I 
went back to sleep again. In the morning I was dressed and 
gone before it was light, Rinaldi did not wake when I left. 

I had not seen the Bainsizza before and it was strange 
to go up the slope where the Austrians had been, beyond 
the place on the river where I had been wounded. There 
was a steep new road and many trucks. Beyond the 
road flattened out and I saw’ w^oods and steep hills in 
the mist. There W’ere woods that had been taken quickly 
and not smashed. Then beyond w’here the road was 
not protected by the hills it w-as screened by matting 
on the sides and over the top. The road ended in a 
wrecked village. The lines w’ere up beyond. There 
was much artillery around. The houses were badly 
smashed but things were very w’ell organized and there 
w'ere signboards everywhere. We found Gino and he 
got us some coffee and later I w^ent with him and met 
various people and saw the posts. Gino said the British 
cars w’ere w'orking further dowm the Bainsizza at Ravne. 
He had great admiration for the British, There W’as 
still a certain amount of shelling, he said, but not many 
w’ounded. There w’ould be many sick now’ the rains had 
started. The Austrians w’ere supposed to attack but 
he did not believe it. We were supposed to attack too, 
but they had not brought up any new’ troops so he 
thought that was off too. Food w’as scarce and he w’ould 
be glad to get a full meal in Gorizia. What kind of 
supper had I had? I told him and he said that would 
be wonderful. He was especially impressed by the 

191 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

doles, I did not describe it in detail, only said it was a 
dolce^ and I think he believed it was something more 
elaborate than bread pudding. 

Did I know where he was going to go? I said I didn’t 
but that some of the other cars were at Caporetto. He 
hoped he would go up that way. It was a nice little 
place and he liked the high mountain hauling up beyond. 
He was a nice boy and every one seemed to like him. 
He said where it really had been hell was at San Gabriele 
and the attack beyond Lorn that had gone bad. He 
said the Austrians had a great amount of artillery in the 
woods along Ternova ridge beyond and above us, and 
shelled the roads badly at night. There was a battery of 
naval guns that had gotten on his nerves . I would recognize 
them because of their flat trajectory. You heard the report 
and then the shriek commenced almost instantly. They 
usually fired two guns at once, one right after the other, 
and the fragments from the burst were enormous. He 
showed me one, a smoothly jagged piece of metal over a 
foot long. It looked like babbiting metal. 

‘I don’t suppose they are so effective,’ Gino said. 
‘But they scare me. They all sound as though they 
came directly for you. There is the boom, then instantly 
the shriek and burst. What’s the use of not being wounded 
if they scare you to death?’ 

He said there were Croats in the lines opposite us 
now and some Magyars. Our troops were still in the 
attacking positions. There was no wire to speak of and 
no place to fall back to if there should be an Austrian 
attack. There were fine positions for defence along the 
low mountains that came up out of the plateau but 
nothing had been done about organizing them for defence. 
What did I think about the Bainsizza anyway? 

193 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I had expected it to be flatter, more like a plateau. I 
had not realized it was so broken up. 

'Alta piano, ^ Gino said, 'but no piano.’ 

We went back to the cellar of the house where he 
lived. I said I thought a ridge that flattened out on 
top and had a little depth would be easier and more 
practical to hold than a succession of small mountains. 
It was no harder to attack up a mountain than on the 
level, I argued. 'That depends on the mountains,’ he 
said. ‘Look at San Gabriele.’ 

A"es,’ I said, ‘but w^here they had trouble was at the 
top where it was fiat. They got up to the top easy 
enough,’ 

‘Not so easy,’ he said. 

A^es/ I said, ‘but that was a special case because 
it was a fortress rather than a mountain amway. The 
Austrians had been fortlAinr it for years.’ I meant 
tactically speaking in a war where there w’as some 
movement. A succession of mountains were nothing to 
hold as a line because it was too easy to turn them. 
You should have possible mobility and a mountain is 
not Y&Tj mobile. Also, people always over-shoot down 
hill. If the flank were turned, the best men would be 
left on the highest mountains. I did not believe in a 
war in mountains. I had thought about it a lot, I said. 
Y'ou pinched off one mountain and they pinched off an- 
other but when something really started every one had 
to get down off the mountains. 

‘What were you going to do if you had a mountain 
frontier?’ he asked. 

T had not worked that out yet,’ I said, and we both 
laughed. ‘But,’ I said, ‘in the old days the Austrians 
were always whipped in the quadrilateral around Verona. 
N 193 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

They let them come down on to the plain and -whipped 
them there/ 

'Yes/ said Gino. ‘But those were Frenchmen and 
you can work out military^ problems clearly when you 
are fighting in somebody else’s countr^u’ 

'Yes/ I agreed, ‘when it is your own country you 
cannot use it so scientifically/ 

‘The Russians did, to trap Napoleon/ 

‘Yes, but they had plenty of country. If you tried 
to retreat to trap Napoleon in Italy you would find 
yourself in Brindisi.' 

‘A terrible place/ said Gino. ‘Have you ever been 
there?' 

‘Not to stay/ 

T am a patriot/ Gmo said. ‘But I cannot love Brindisi 
or Taranto/ 

‘Do you love the Bainsizza?' I asked. 

‘The soil is sacred/ he said. ‘But I wish it grew more 
potatoes. You know when we came here w^e found fields 
of potatoes the Austrians had planted.’ 

‘Has the food really been short?’ 

T myself have never had enough to eat but I am a 
big eater and I have not starved. The mess is average. 
The regiments in the line get pretty good food but those 
in support don’t get so much. Something is wrong 
somewhere. There should be plenty of food.’ / 

‘The dogfish are selling it somewhere else.’ 

‘Yes, they give the battalions in the front line as much 
as they can but the ones in back are very short. They 
have eaten all the Austrians’ potatoes and chestnuts 
from the woods. They ought to feed them better. We 
are big eaters. I am sure there is plenty of food. It 
is very bad for the soldiers to be short of food. Have 

194 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

you ever noticed the difference it makes in the way you 

think?’ 

‘Yes/ I said. Yt can’t win a war but it can lose 

one.’ 

YVe Avon’t talk about losing. There is enough talk 
about losing. What has been done this summer cannot 
have been done in vain.’ 

I did not say an}i:hing. I was always embarrassed 
by the words sacred, glorious and sacrifice and the ex- 
pression in vain. We had heard them, sometimes stand- 
ing in the rain almost out of earshot, so that only the 
shouted words came through, and had read them, on 
proclamations that were slapped up by billposters over 
other proclamations, now for a long time, and I had 
seen nothing sacred, and the things that were glorious 
had no glory and the sacrifices were like the stock- 
yards at Chicago if nothing was done with the meat 
except to bury it. There were many words that you 
could not stand to hear and finally only the names of 
places had dignity. Certain numbers were the same 
way and certain dates and these with the names of the 
places were all you could say and have them mean any- 
thing. Abstract words such as glory, honour, courage, 
or hallow were obscene beside the concrete names of 
villages, the numbers of roads, the names of rivers, the 
numbers of regiments and the dates. ,Gino was a patriot, 
so he said things that separated us sometimes, but he 
was also a fine boy and I understood his being a patriot. 
He was bom one. He left with Peduzzi in the car to go 
back to Gorizia. 

It stormed all that day. The wind drove down the 
rain and everywhere there was standing water and 
mud. The plaster of the broken houses was grey and 

195 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

wet. Late in the afternoon the rain stopped and from 
our number two post I saw the bare wet autumn country 
with clouds over the tops of the hills and the straw 
screening over the roads wet and dripping. The sun 
came out once before it went dowm and shone on the 
bare woods beyond the ridge. There were many Austrian 
guns in the woods on that ridge but only a few fired. 
I watched the sudden round puffs of shrapnel smoke 
in the sky above a broken farmhouse near where the 
line was; soft puffs with a yellow- white flash in the centre. 
You saw the flash, then heard the crack, then saw the 
smoke ball distort and thin in the wind. There were 
many iron shrapnel balls in the rubble of the houses 
and on the road beside the broken house where the 
post was, but they did not shell near the post that after- 
noon. We loaded two cars and drove down the road 
that was screened with wet mats and the last of the sun 
came through in the breaks between tlie strips of 
matting. Before we were out on the clear road behind 
the hill the sun w’as dovm. We went on dowm the 
clear road and as it turned a comer into the open and 
went into the square arched tunnel of matting the rain 
started again. 

The wind rose in the night and at three o’clock in the 
morning with the rain coming in sheets there wns a 
bombardment and the Croatians came over across the 
mountain meadows and through patches of woods and 
into the front line. They fought in the dark in the rain 
£md a counter-attack of scared men from the second 
line drove them back. There was much shelling and 
many rockets in the rain and machine-gun and rifle 
fire all along the line. They did not come again and it 
was quieter and between the gusts of wind and rain 

196 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


we could hear the sound of a great bombardment far 

to the north. 

The wounded were coming into the post, some were 
carried on stretchers, some walking and some were 
brought on the backs of men that came across the field. 
They were wet to the skin and all were scared. We 
filled two cars with stretcher cases as they came up from 
the cellar of the post and as I shut the door of the second 
car and fastened it I felt the rain on my face turn to 
snow. The flakes were coming heavy and fast in the 
rain. 

When daylight came the storm w^as still blowing but 
the snow had stopped. It had melted as it fell on the 
wet ground and now it was raining again. There was 
another attack just after da3dight but it was unsuccess- 
ful. Wq expected an attack all day but it did not come 
until the sun was going down. The bombardment 
started to the south below the long wooded ridge where 
the Austrian guns were concentrated. We expected a 
bombardment but it did not come. It was getting dark. 
Guns were firing from the field behind the village and 
the shells, going away, had a comfortable sound. 

We heard that the attack to the south had been un- 
successful. They did not attack that night but we heard 
that they had broken through to the north. In the night 
word came that we v/ere to prepare to retreat. The cap- 
tain at the post told me this. He had it from the Brigade. 
A little while later he came from the telephone and 
said it was a lie. The Brigade had received orders that 
the line of the Bainsizza should be held no matter what 
happened. I asked about the break through and he 
said that he had heard at the Brigade that the Austrians 
had broken through the twenty-seventh army corps 

197 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

up toward Caporetto. There had been a great battle 
in the north ail day. 

Tf those bastards let them through we are cooked/ 

he said. 

Tt’s Germans that are attacking/ one of the medical 
officers said. The word Germans was something to be 
frightened of. We did not want to have anything to do 
with the Germans. 

® There are fifteen divisions of Germans/ the medical 
officer said. ^They have broken through and we will be 
cut off.’ 

Wt the Brigade they say this line is to be held. They 
say they have not broken through badly and that 
we will hold a line across the mountains from Monte 
Maggiore.’ 

‘"Where do they hear this?’ 

‘From the Division.’ 

‘The word that we were to retreat came from the 
Division.’ 

‘We work under the Army Corps,’ I said. ‘But here 
I work under you. Naturally when you tell me to go I 
will go. But get the orders straight.’ 

‘The orders are that we stay here. You clear the 
wounded from here to the clearing station.’ 

‘Sometimes we clear from the clearing station to 
the field hospitals too,’ I said. ‘Tell me, I have never 
seen a retreat - if there is a retreat how are all the wounded 
evacuated?’ 

‘They are not. They take as many as they can and 
leave the rest.’ 

‘What will I take in the cars?’ 

‘Hospital equipment.’ 

‘All right,’ I said. 


198 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Tile next night the retreat started. We heard that 
Germans and Austrians had broken through in the 
north and were coming down the mountain valleys to- 
ward Cividale and Udine. The retreat was orderly, 
wet and sullen. In the night, going slowly along the 
crowded roads we passed troops marching under the 
rain, guns, horses pulling wagons, mules, motor trucks, 
all moving away from the front. There was no more 
disorder than in an advance. 

That night we helped empty the field hospitals that 
had been set up in the least rained villages of the plateau, 
taking the wounded down to Plava on the river-bed: 
and the next day hauled all day in the rain to evacuate 
the hospitals and clearing station at Plava. It rained 
steadily and the army of the Bainsizza moved down 
off the plateau in the October rain and across the river 
where the great victories had commenced in the spring 
of that year. We came into Gorizia in the middle of 
the next day. The rain had stopped and the town was 
nearly empty. As we came up the street they were loading 
the girls from the soldiers’ whorehouse into a truck. 
There were seven girls and they had on their hats and 
coats and carried small suitcases. Two of them were 
cnfing. Of the others one smiled at us and put out her 
tongue and fluttered it up and down. She had thick 
full lips and black eyes. 

I stopped the car and went over and spoke to the matron. 
The girls from the officers’ house had left early that 
morning, she said. Where were they going? To 
Conegliano, she said. The truck started. The girl with 
thick lips put out her tongue again at us. The matron 
waved. The two girls kept on cixdng. The others looked 
interestedly out at the town. I got back in the car. 

199 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

AVe ought to go with them/ Bonello said. ‘That 

would be a good trip.’ 

‘Well have a good trip/ I said. 

‘Well have a heli of a trip.’ 

‘That’s what I mean/ I said. We came up the drive 

to the villa, 

T’d like to be there when some of those tough babies 
climb ill.’ 

‘You think they will?’ 

‘Sure. Eveiy’body in the Second Army know^s that 
matron.’ 

We were outside the villa. 

‘They call her the Alother Superior/ Bonello said. 
‘The girls are new but everybody know^s her. They 
must have brought them up just before the retreat.’ 

‘Theyll have a time.’ 

‘I’ll say theyll have a time. I’d like to have a crack 
at them for nothing. They charge too much at that 
house amw’ay. The government gyps us.’ 

‘Take the car out and have the mechanics go over 
it/ I said. ‘Change the oil and check the differential. 
Fill it up and then get some sleep.’ 

‘Yes, Signor Tenente.’ 

The villa was empty. Rinaldi was gone with the 
hospital. The major w’as gone taking hospital personnel 
in the staff car. There was a note on the window for 
me to fill the cars wdth the material piled in the hall and 
to proceed to Pordenone. The mechanics w^ere gone 
already. I went out back to the garage. The other two 
cars came in while I w^as there and their drivers got 
down. It was starting to rain again. 

I m so — sleepy I went to sleep three times coming here 
from Plava/ Piani said. ‘What are w^e going to do, Tenente?’ 

200 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'We’II change the oil, grease them, fill them up, then 
take them around in front and load up the junk theyh^e 
left/ 

‘Then do we start?’ 

‘No, we’ii sleep for three hours/ 

‘Christ, I’m glad to sleep/ Bonello said. ‘I couldn’t 
keep awake driving/ 

‘How’s your car, Aymo?’ I asked. 

‘It’s all right.’ 

‘Get me a monkey suit and I’ll help you with the 

oil/ 

‘Don’t you do that, Tenente,’ Aymo said. ‘It’s nothing 
to do. You go and pack your things/ 

‘?vly things are all packed/ I said. ‘I’ll go and carry 
out the stuff that they left for us. Bring the cars around 
as soon as they’re ready.’ 

They brought the cars around to the front of the 
villa and we loaded them with the hospital equipment 
which Avas piled in the hallway. When it was all in, 
the three cars stood in line down the driveway under the 
trees in the rain. We went inside. 

‘Alake a fire in the kitchen and dry your things/ I 
said. 

‘I don’t care about dry clothes/ Piani said. T want 
to sleep.’ 

‘I’m going to sleep on the major’s bed/ Bonello said. 

T don’t care where I sleep/ Piani said. 

‘There are two beds in here/ I opened the door, 

T never knew what was in that room/ Bonello said. 

‘That was old fish-face’s room,’ Piani said. 

‘You two sleep in there,’ I said. ‘I’ll wake you/ 

‘The Austrians will wake us if you sleep too long, 
Tenente/ Bonello said. 


201 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T won\ oversleep/ I said. ‘Where’s Aymo?’ 

‘He went out in the kitchen.’ 

‘Get to sleep,’ I said. 

T’ll sleep,’ Piani said. ‘I’ve been asleep sitting up 
ail day. The whole top of my head kept coming down 
over my eyes.’ 

‘Take your boots off,’ Bonello said. ‘That’s old 
fish-face’s bed.’ 

‘Fish-face is nothing to me.’ Piani lay on the bed, 
his muddy boots straight out, his head on his arm. I 
went out to the kitchen. Ajnno had a fire in the stove 
and a kettle of water on. 

‘I thought I’d start some pasta asciutta^ he said. 
‘We’ll be hungr}’’ when we wake up.’ 

‘Aren’t you sleepy, Bartolomeo?’ 

‘Not so sleepy. When the water boils I’ll leave it. 
The fire will go down.’ 

‘You’d better get some sleep,’ I said. ‘We can eat 
cheese and monkey meat.’ 

‘This is better,’ he said. ‘Something hot will be good 
for those two anarchists. You go to sleep, Tenente.’ 

‘There’s a bed in the major’s room.’ 

‘You sleep there.’ 

‘No, I’m going up to my old room. Do you want 
a drink, Bartolomeo?’ 

‘When we go, Tenente. Now it wouldn’t do me any 
good.’ 

‘If you wake in three hours and I haven’t called you, 
wake me, will you?’ 

‘I haven’t any watch, Tenente.’ 

‘There’s a clock on the wall in the major’s room.’ 

‘All right.’ 

I went out then through the dining-room and the 

202 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


hall and up the marble stairs to the room where I had 
lived with Rinaldi. It was raining outside. I went 
to the window and looked out. It was getting dark and 
I saw the three cars standing in line under the trees. 
The trees were dripping in the rain. It was cold and 
the drops hung to the branches. I went back to Rinaldi’s 
bed and lay down and let sleep take me. 

We ate in the kitchen before we started. Aymo had 
a basin of spaghetti with onions and tinned meat chopped 
up in it. We sat around the table and drank tw^o bottles 
of the wine that had been left in the cellar of the villa. 
It was dark outside and still raining, Piani sat at the 
table very sleepy. 

T like a retreat better than an advance,’ Bonello said. 
'On a retreat we drink barbera.’ 

‘We drink it now. To-morrow maybe we drink rain- 
water,’ Aymo said. 

‘To-morrow we’ll be in Udine. We’ll drink cham- 
pagne. That’s where the slackers live. Wake up, Piani! 
We’ll drink champagne to-morrow in Udine!’ 

‘I’m awake,’ Piani said. He filled his plate with the 
spaghetti and meat. ‘Couldn’t you find tomato sauce, 
Barto?’ 

‘There wasn’t any,’ Aymo said. 

‘We’II drink champagne in Udine/ Bonello said. He 
filled his glass with the clear red barbera. 

‘Have you eaten enough, Tenenter’ Aymo asked. 

‘I’ve got plenty. Give me the bottle, Bartolomeo.’ 

T have a bottle apiece to take in the cars/ Aymo said. 

‘Did you sleep at all?’ 

T don’t need much sleep. I slept a little.’ 

‘To-morrow we’ll sleep in the king’s bed/ Bonello 
said. He was feeling very good. 

203 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Til sleep with the queen/ Boneilo said. He looked 
to see how I took the joke. 

'Shut up/ I said. ‘You get too funny with a little 
wine/ Outside it was raining hard. I looked at my 
watch. It was half-past nine. 

Tt’s time to roll/ I said and stood up. 

'Who are you going to ride wdth, Tenente?’ Boneilo 
asked. 

‘With Aymo. Then you come. Then Piani. Well 
start out on the road for Cormons.’ 

‘Fm afraid 111 go to sleep/ Piani said. 

‘All right. Ill ride with you. Then Boneilo. Then 
Aymo.’ 

‘That’s the best way/ Piani said. ‘Because I’m so 
sleepy.’ 

‘I’ll drive and you sleep awhile.’ 

‘No. I can drive just so long as I know somebody will 
wake me up if I go to sleep.’ 

Til wake you up. Put out the lights, Barto.’ 

‘You might as well leave them/ Boneilo said. ‘We’ve 
got no more use for this place.’ 

‘I have a small locker trunk in my room/ I said. ‘Will 
you help take it down, Piani?’ 

‘We’ll take it,’ Piani said. ‘Come on, Aldo.’ He 
went off into the hall with Boneilo. I heard them going 
upstairs. 

‘This was a fine place,’ Bartolomeo Aymo said. He 
put two bottles of wine and half a cheese into his haver- 
sack. ‘There won’t be a place like this again. Where 
will they retreat to, Tenente?’ 

‘Beyond the Tagliamento, they say. The hospital and 
the sector are to be at Pordenone.’ 

‘This is a better town than Pordenone.’ 

204 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T don’t know Pordenone/ I said. TVe just been 
through there,’ 

Tt’s not much of a place/ Aymo said. 


CHAPTER 28 

As we moved out through the town it was empty in 
the rain and the dark except for columns of troops and 
guns that were going through the main street. There 
were many trucks too and some carts going through on 
other streets and converging on the main road. When 
we were out past the tanneries onto the main road the 
troops, the motor trucks, the horse-drawn carts and the 
guns were in one wide slow-moving column. We moved 
slowly but steadily in the rain, the radiator cap of our 
car almost against the tailboard of a truck that was 
loaded high, the load covered with wet canvas. Then 
the truck stopped. The whole column was stopped. It 
started again and we went a little farther, then stopped. 
I got out and walked ahead, going between the trucks 
and carts and under the wet necks of the horses. The 
block was farther ahead. I left the road, crossed the 
ditch on a footboard and walked along the field beyond 
the ditch. I could see the stalled column beUveen the 
trees in the rain as I went forward across from it in 
the field. I went about a mile. The column did not 
move, although on the other side beyond the stalled 
vehicles I could see the troops moving. I went back 
to the cars. This block might extend as far as Udine. 
Piani was asleep over the wheel. I climbed up beside 

205 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

him and went to sleep too. Several hours later I heard 
the truck ahead of us grinding into gear. I woke Piani 
and we started, moving a few yards, then stopping, 
then going on again. It was still raining. 

The column stalled again in the night and did not 
start. I got down and w'ent back to see Aymo and 
Bonello. Bonello had two sergeants of engineers on 
the seat of his car with him. They stiffened when I 
came up. 

‘They were left to do something to a bridge,’ Bonello 
said. ‘They can’t find their unit so I gave them a ride.’ 

‘Wuth the Sir Lieutenant’s permission.’ 

‘With permission,’ I said. 

‘The lieutenant is an American,’ Bonello said. ‘He’ll 
give anybody a ride.’ 

One of the sergeants smiled. The other asked Bonello 
if I w’as an Italian from North or South America. 

‘He’s not an Italian. He’s North American English.’ 

The sergeants were polite but did not believe it. I 
left them and went back to Aymo. He had two girls 
on the seat with him and was sitting back in the comer 
and smoking. 

‘Barto, Barto,’ I said. He laughed. 

‘Talk to them, Tenente,’ he said. ‘I can’t understand 
them. Hey!’ he put his hand on the girl’s thigh and 
squeezed it in a friendly way. The girl drew her shawl 
tight around her and pushed his hand away. ‘Heyl’ 
he said. ‘Tell the Tenente your name and what you’re 
doing here.’ 

The girl looked at me fiercely. The other girl kept 
her eyes down. The girl who looked at me said some- 
thing in a dialect I could not understand a word of. 
She was plump and dark and looked about sixteen. 

206 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

^Sorella?’ I asked and pointed at the other girL 

She nodded her head and smiled. 

'All right/ I said and patted her knee. I felt her 
stiffen away when I touched her. The sister never 
looked up. She looked perhaps a year younger. Aymo 
put his hand on the elder girFs thigh and she pushed it 
away. He laughed at her. 

^Good man/ he pointed at himself. 'Good man/ he 
pointed at me. 'Don^t you worry.’ The girl looked at 
him fiercely. The pair of them were like two wild birds. 

'What does she ride with me for if she doesn’t like 
me?’ Aymo asked. ‘They got right up in the car the 
minute I motioned to them.’ He turned to the girl. 
‘Don’t worry%’ he said. ‘No danger of-/ using 
the wlgar word. ‘No place for-.’ I could see she 
understood the w’ord and that w^as all. Her eyes looked 
at him very scared. She pulled the shawl tight. ‘Car 
all full/ xAymo said. ‘No danger of-. No place for-.’ 
Every time he said the word the girl stiffened a little. 
Then sitting stiffly and looking at him she began to cry. 
I saw her lips w^orking and then tears came down her 
plump cheeks. Her sister, not looking up, took her hand 
and they sat there together. The older one, w^ho had been 
so fierce, began to sob. 

T guess I scared her/ Ajino said. ‘I didn’t mean to 
scare her.’ 

Bartolomeo brought out his knapsack and cut off 
tw^o pieces of cheese. ‘Here,’ he said. ‘Stop crying.’ 

The older girl shook her head and still cried, but the 
younger girl took the cheese and commenced to eat. 
After a while the younger girl gave her sister the second 
piece of cheese and they both ate. The older sister still 
sobbed a little. 


207 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘She’ll be all right after a while,’ Ajino said. 

An idea came to him. ‘Virgin?’ he asked the girl next 
to him. She nodded her head vigorously. ‘Virgin too?’ 
he pointed to the sister. Both the girls nodded their 
heads and the elder said something in dialect. 

‘That’s all right,’ Bartolomeo said. ‘That’s all 
right.’ 

Both the girls seemed cheered. 

I left them sitting together with Aymo sitting back 
in the comer and went back to Piani’s car. The column 
of vehicles did not move but the troops kept passing 
alongside. It was still raining hard and I thought some 
of the stops in the movement of the column might be 
from cars with wet wiring. More likely they were 
from horses or men going to sleep. Still, traffic could 
tie up in cities when every one was aw'ake. It was the 
combination of horse and motor vehicles. They did not 
help each other any. The peasants’ carts did not help 
much either. Those w^ere a couple of fine girls with 
Barto. A retreat was no place for tw'o virgins. Real 
virgins. Probably very religious. If there were no 
war we would probably all be in bed. In bed I lay me 
down my head. Bed and board. Stiff as a board in 
bed. Catherine was in bed now between two sheets, 
over her and under her. Which side did she sleep on? 
Alaybe she wasn’t asleep. Maybe she was lying think- 
ing about me. Blow', blow, ye western wind. Well, it 
blew and it wasn’t the small rain but the big rain down 
that rained. It rained all night. You knew it rained 
dovm that rain. Look at it. Christ, that my love were 
in my arms and I in my bed again. That my love Cath- 
erine. That my sweet love Catherine dovm might rain. 
Blow her again to me. Well, we were in it. Every one 

308 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

was caught in it and the small rain would not quiet it. 
'Good-rdght, Catherine/ I said out loud. 'I hope you 
sleep well. If it’s too uncomfortable, darling, lie on the 
other side/ I said, T’ll get you some cold water. In a 
little while it will be morning and then it won’t be so 
bad. I’m sorry he makes you so uncomfortable. Try 
and go to sleep, sweet.’ 

I was asleep all the time, she said. You’ve been talk- 
ing in your sleep. iVre you all right 

Are you really there? 

Of course, Fm here. I wouldn’t go away. This doesn’t 
make any difference between us. 

You’re so lovely and sweet. You wouldn’t go away 
in the night, would you? 

Of course I v;ouIdn’t go away. Fm always here. I 
come whenever you want me. 

' — Piani said. 'They’ve started again.’ 

T was dopey,’ I said. I looked at my watch. It was 
three o’clock in the morning. I reached back behind the 
seat for a bottle of the barbera. 

'You talked out loud,’ Piani said. 

T was having a dream in English,’ I said. 

The rain \vas slacking and we were moving along. 
Before daylight we were stalled again and when it was 
light we were at a little rise in the ground and I saw the 
road of the retreat stretched out far ahead, everything 
stationary except for the infantry filtering through. We 
started to move again but seeing the rate of progress in 
the daylight, I knew we were going to have to get off 
that main road some way and go across country if we 
ever hoped to reach Udine. 

In the night many peasants had joined the column 
from the roads of the country and in the column there 

o 209 



A FAREWELL TO ARAIS 

were carts loaded with household goods; there were 
mirrors projecting up between mattresses, and chickens 
and ducks tied to carts. There was a sewing machine 
on the cart ahead of us in the rain. They had saved 
the most valuable things. On some carts the women sat 
huddled from the rain and others w^alked beside the 
carts keeping as close to them as they could. There were 
dogs now in the column, keeping under the wagons as 
they moved along. The road was muddy, the ditches at 
the side were high with water and beyond the trees that 
lined the road the fields looked too wet and too soggy 
to try" to cross. I got down from the car and worked 
up the road a Ava}", looking for a place vrhere I could see 
ahead to find a side-road we could take across country. 
I knew there were many side-roads but did not want one 
that would lead to nothing. I could not remember them 
because we had always passed them bowling along in 
the car on the main road and they all looked much 
alike. Xow I knew we must find one if we hoped to 
get through. Xo one knew where the Austrians were 
nor how things were going but I was certain that if the 
rain should stop and planes come over and get to work 
on that column that it would be all over. All that was 
needed was for a few men to leave their trucks or a few 
horses to be killed to tie up completely the movement 
on the road. 

The rain was not falling so heavily now and I thought 
it might clear. I went ahead along the edge of the road 
and when there was a small road that led off to the 
north between two fields with a hedge of trees on both 
sides, I thought that we had better take it and hurried 
back to the cars. I told Piani to turn off and went back 
to tell Bonello and Aymo. 


zio 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'If it leads nowhere we can turn around and cut back 
ind I said* 

about these?' Bonello asked. His two sergeants 
were beside him on the seat. They were unshaven 
blit still miiitar}’^ looking in the early morning. 

'They’ll be good to push/ I said. I went back to 
Aymo and told him we were going to try it across country. 

'What about my virgin family?' Aymo asked. The 
two girls were asleep. 

'They won't be very useful/ I said. 'You ought to 
have some one that could push.' 

'They could go back in the car/ Aymo said. 'There's 
room in the car.' 

'All right if you want them/ I said. 'Pick up somebody 
with a wide back to push/ 

'Bersaglieri/ Aymo smiled. 'They have the widest 
backs. They measure them. How do you feel, Tenente?’ 

'Fine. How are you?' 

'Fine. But very hungry/ 

'There ought to be something up that road and we 
will stop and eat.’ 

'How's your leg, Tenente?’ 

'Fine,' I said. Standing on the step and looking up 
ahead I could see Piani’s car pulling out onto the little 
side-road and starting up it, his car showing through 
the hedge of bare branches. Bonello turned off and 
followed him and then Piani worked his way out and 
we followed the two ambulances ahead along the narrow 
road between hedges. It led to a farmhouse. We found 
Piani and Bonello stopped in the farmyard. The house 
was low and long with a trellis with a grape-vine over 
the door. There was a vrell in the yard and Piani was 
getting up water to fill his radiator. So much going 

2II 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

in low gear had boiled it out. The farmhouse was deserted. 
I looked back down the road, the farmhouse was on a 
slight elevation above the plain, and we could see over 
the country, and saw the road, the hedges, the fields 
and the line of trees along the main road where the 
retreat was passing. The two sergeants were looking 
through the house. The girls were awake and looking 
at the courtyard, the well and the tw^o big ambulances 
in front of the farmhouse, with three drivers at the well. 
One of the sergeants came out with a clock in his hand. 

Tut it back,’ I said. He looked at me, went in the 
house and came back without the clock. 

‘Where’s your partner?’ I asked. 

‘He’s gone to the latrine.’ He got up on the seat of 
the ambulance. He was afraid we would leave him. 

‘What about breakfast, Tenente?’ Eonello asked. 
‘We could eat something. It wouldn’t take very long.’ 

‘Do you think this road going down on the other 
side will lead to anything?’ 

‘Sure.’ 

‘All right. Let’s eat.’ Piani and Bonello went in the 
house. 

‘Come on,’ Aymo said to the girls. He held his hand 
to help them down. The older sister shook her head. 
They were not going into any deserted house. They 
looked after us. 

‘They are difficult,’ Aymo said. We went into the 
farmhouse together. It was large and dark and aban- 
doned feeling. Bonello and Piani were in the kitchen. 

‘There’s not much to eat,’ Piani said. ‘They’ve cleaned 
it out.’ 

Bonello sliced a big white cheese on the heavy kitchen 
table. 


ziz 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Where was the cheese?’ 

Tii the cellar. Piani found wine too and apples.’ 

'That’s a good breakfast.’ 

Fiaiii was taking the wooden cork out of a big wicker- 
covered wine-jug. He tipped it and poured a copper 

pan full. 

Tt smelis all right,’ he said. ‘Find some beakers, 

Barto.’ 

The two sergeants came in. 

‘Have some cheese, sergeants,’ Bonello said. 

‘We should go,’ one of the sergeants said, eating his 
cheese and drinking a cup of wine. 

‘We’ll go. Don’t worr}’,’ Bonello said. 

‘An army travels on its stomach,’ I said. 

‘What?’ asked the sergeant. 

Tt’s better to eat.’ 

‘Yes. But time is precious.’ 

‘I believe the bastards have eaten already,’ Piani 
said. The sergeants looked at him. They hated the lot 
of us. 

‘You know the road?’ one of them asked me. 

‘Xo,’ I said. They looked at each other. 

‘We would do best to start,’ the first one said. 

‘We are starting,’ I said. I drank another cup of 
the red wine. It tasted very good after the cheese and 
apple. 

‘Bring the cheese,’ I said and went out. Bonello came 
out carrying the great jug of wine. 

‘That’s too big,’ I said. He looked at it regretfully. 

T guess it is,’ he said. ‘Give me the canteens to fill.’ 
He filled the canteens and some of the wine ran out on 
the stone paving of the courtyard. Then he picked up 
the wine jug and put it just inside the door. 

^^3 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'The Austrians can find it without breaking the door 
down/ he said. 

AYell roll/ I said. Tiani and I will go ahead.’ The 
two engineers were already on the seat beside Bonello. 
The girls were eating cheese and apples. Aymo was 
smoking. We started off down the narrow road. I 
looked back at the two cars coming and the farmhouse. 
It was a fine, low, solid stone house and the ironwork 
of the well was very good. Ahead of us the road was 
narrow and muddy and there was a high hedge on either 
side. Behind, the cars were following closely. 


CHAPTER 29 

At noon we were stuck in a muddy road about, as nearly 
as we could figure, ten kilometres from Udine. The 
rain had stopped during the forenoon and three times 
we had heard planes coming, seen them pass overhead, 
watched them go far to the left and heard them bombing 
on the main high road. We had worked through a network 
of secondary roads and had taken many roads that were 
blind, but had always, by backing up and finding another 
road, gotten closer to Udine. Now, Aymo’s car, in 
backing so that we might get out of a blind road, had 
gotten into the soft earth at the side and the wheels, 
spinning, had dug deeper and deeper until the car rested 
on its differential. The thing to do now was to dig out 
in front of the wheels, put in brush so that the chains 
could grip, and then push until the car was on the road. 
We were all down on the road around the car. The 

214 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

tViO sergeants looked at the car and examined the wheels, 
Then they started oiT down the road without a word. 
I went after them, 

'Come on/ I said, ‘Cut some brush d 

AVe have to go/ one said. 

‘Get busy/ I said, 'and cut brush.’ 

AVe have to go/ one said. The other said nothing. 
They were in a hurry^ to start. They would not look at me. 

T order you to come back to the car and cut brush/ 
I said. The one sergeant turned, AVe have to go on. 
In a little while you will be cut off. You can’t order 
us. You’re not our officer.’ 

T order you to cut brush/ I said. They turned and 
started down the road. 

‘Halt/ I said. They kept on down the muddy road, 
the hedge on either side. T order you to halt/ I called. 
They went a little faster. I opened up my holster, took 
the pistol, aimed at the one who had talked the most, 
and fired. I missed and they both started to run. I 
shot three times and dropped one. The other went 
through the hedge and was out of sight. I fired at him 
through the hedge as he ran across the field. The pistol 
clicked empty and I put in another clip. I saw it was 
too far to shoot at the second sergeant. He was far across 
the field, running, his head held low. I commenced to 
reload the empty clip. Bonello came up. 

‘Let me go finish him,’ he said, I handed him the 
pistol and he walked down to where the sergeant of 
engineers lay face down across the road. Bonello leaned 
over, put the pistol against the man’s head and pulled 
the trigger. The pistol did not fire. 

‘You have to cock it,’ I said. He cocked it and fired 
twice. He took hold of the sergeant s legs and pulled 

ai5 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

him to the side of the road so he lay beside the hedge. 
He came back and handed me the pistol. 

‘The son of a bitch,’ he said. He looked toward the 
sergeant. ‘You see me shoot him, Tenente?’ 

‘We’ve got to get the brush quickly,’ I said. ‘Did 
I hit the other one at all?’ 

‘I don’t think so,’ Ajmio said. ‘He was too far away 
to hit with a pistol.’ 

‘The dirty scum,’ Piani said. We \vere all cutting 
twigs and branches. Everj-thing had been taken out 
of the car. Bonello was digging out in front of the wheels. 
When we were ready Aymo started the car and put 
it into gear. The wheels spun round throwing brush 
and mud. Bonello and I pushed until we could feel our 
joints crack. The car wmuld not move. 

‘Rock her back and forth, Barto,’ I said. 

He drove the engine in reverse, then forward. The 
wheels only dug in deeper. Then the car was resting 
on the differential again, and the wheels spun freely in 
the holes they had dug. I straightened up. 

‘We’ll tiy her with a rope,’ I said. 

‘I don’t think it’s any use, Tenente. You can’t get 
a straight pull.’ 

‘We have to try it,’ I said. ‘She won’t come out any 
other way.’ 

Piani’s and Bonello’s cars could only move straight 
ahead down the narrow road. We roped both cars to- 
gether and pulled. The wheels only pulled sideways 
against the ruts. 

‘It’s no good,’ I shouted. ‘Stop it.’ 

Piani and Bonello got down from their cars and came 
back. Aymo got down. The girls were up the road about 
forty yards sitting on a stone wall. 

216 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

^What do you say, Tenente?’ Bonello asked. 

AVedl dig out and try once more with the brush/ 
I said. I looked down the road. It was my fault. I 
had led them up here. The sun was almost out from 
behind the clouds and the body of the sergeant lay beside 
the hedge. 

'Well put his coat and cape under/ I said. Bonello 
went to get them. I cut brush and Aymo and Piani 
dug out in front and between the wheels. I cut the 
cape, then ripped it in t'wo, and laid it under the wheel 
in the mud, then piled brush for the wheels to catch. 
We were ready to start and Aymo got up on the seat 
and started the car. The wheels spun and we pushed 
and pushed. But it wasn’t any use. 

Tt’s finished,’ I said. Ts there anything you want 
in the car, Barto?’ 

Aymo climbed up with Bonello, carrying the cheese 
and two bottles of wine and his cape. Bonello, sitting 
behind the wheel was looking through the pockets of 
the sergeant’s coat. 

'Better throw the coat away,’ I said. 'What about 
Barto ’s virgins?’ 

'They can get in the back,’ Piani said. T don’t think 
we are going far.’ 

I opened the back door of the ambulance. 

'Come on,’ I said. 'Get in/ The two girls climbed 
in and sat in the corner. They seemed to have taken no 
notice of the shooting. I looked back up the road. The 
sergeant lay in his dirty long-sleeved underwear. I 
got up with Piani and we started. We were going to 
try to cross the field. When the road entered the field 
I got down and walked ahead. If we could get across, 
there was a road on the other side. We could not get 

217 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

across. It was too soft and muddy for the cars. When 
they were finally and completely stalled, the wheels 
dug in to the hubs, we left them in the field and started on 
foot for Udine. 

When we came to the road which led back toward 
the main highway I pointed down it to the two girls. 

‘Go down there,’ I said. ‘You’ll meet people.’ They 
looked at me. I took out my pocket-book and gave them 
each a ten-lira note. ‘Go down there,’ I said, pointing. 
‘Friends! Family!’ 

They did not understand but they held the money 
tightly and started down the road. They looked back 
as though they were afraid I might take the money 
back. I watched them go down the road, their shawls 
close around them, looking back apprehensively at us. 
The three drivers were laughing. 

‘How much will you give me to go in that direction, 
Tenente?’ Bonello asked. 

‘They’re better off in a bunch of people than alone 
if they catch them,’ I said. 

‘Give me two hundred lire and I’ll walk straight 
back toward Austria,’ Bonello said. 

‘They’d take it away from you,’ Piani said. 

‘Maybe the war will be over,’ Aymo said. We were 
going up the road as fast as we could. The sun was 
trying to come through. Beside the road were mul- 
berry trees. Through the trees I could see our two big 
moving- vans of cars stuck in the field. Piani looked 
back too. 

‘They’ll have to build a road to get them out,’ he 
said. 

‘I wish to Christ we had bicycles,’ Bonello said. 

‘Do they ride bicycles in America?’ Aymo asked. 

ai8 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


^Tiiey used tod 

^Here it is a great thing/ Aymo said. ‘A bicycle is 
a splendid thing.’ 

T wish to Christ we had bicycles/ Bonello said. T’m 
no walker.’ 

Ts that firing?’ I asked. I thought I could hear firing 
a long way away. 

T don’t know/ Aymo said. He listened. 

T think so/ I said. 

'The first thing we will see will be the cavalry/ Piani 
said. 

T don’t think they’ve got any cavalry/ 

T hope to Christ not/ Bonello said. T don’t want 
to be stuck on a lance by any cavalry.’ 

'You certainly shot that sergeant, Tenente/ Piani 
said. We were walking fast. 

T killed him/ Bonello said. T never killed anybody 
in this war, and all my life I’ve wanted to kill a sergeant/ 

'You killed him on the sit all right/ Piani said. 'He 
wasn’t flying very fast when you killed him.’ 

'Never mind. That’s one thing I can always remember. 
I killed that — of a sergeant,’ 

'What will you say in confession?’ Aymo asked. 

T’li say, Bless me, father, I killed a sergeant.’ They 
all laughed, 

'He’s an anarchist/ Piani said. ‘He doesn’t go to 
church.’ 

'Piani’s an anarchist too,’ Bonello said. 

'Are you really anarchists?’ I asked. 

'No, Tenente. We’re socialists. We come from 
Imola ’ 

'Haven't you ever been there?’ 

'No.’ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘By Christ it’s a fine place, Tenente. You come there 
after the war and w'e’Il show you something.’ 

‘Are you all socialists?’ 

‘Everybody.’ 

‘Is it a fine town?’ 

‘Wonderful. You never saw a town like that.’ 

‘How did you get to be socialists?’ 

‘We’re all socialists. Everybody is a socialist. We’ve 
always been socialists.’ 

‘You come, Tenente. We’ll make you a socialist 
too.’ 

Ahead the road turned off to the left and there was 
a little hill and, beyond a stone wall, an apple orchard. 
As the road went uphill they ceased talking. We walked 
along together all going fast against time. 


CHAPTER 30 


L-^ter we were on a road that led to a river. There 
was a long line of abandoned trucks and carts on the 
road leading up to the bridge. No one was in sight. 
The river was high and the bridge had been blown up 
in the centre; the stone arch was fallen into the river 
and the brown water was going over it. We went on 
up the bank looking for a place to cross. Up above I 
knew there was a railway bridge and I thought we 
might be able to get across there. The path was wet 
and muddy. We did not see any troops; only aban- 
doned trucks and stores. Along the river bank there 
was nothing and no one but the wet brush and muddy 

220 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


^iTfound. We went up to the bank and finally we saw 
the railway bridge. 

^What a beautiful bridge/ Aymo said. It was a long 
plain iron bridge across what was usually a dry river-bed . 

'We better hurry and get across before they blow it 
up/ I said. 

'There's nobody to blow it up/ Piani said. 'They're 
all gone.' 

'It's probably mined/ Bonello said. 'You cross first, 
Tenente.' 

'Listen to the anarchist/ Aymo said. 'Make him go 
first.' 

'I'll go/ I said. 'It won't be mined to blow up with 
one man.' 

'You see/ Piani said. 'That is brains. Why haven't 
you brains, anarchist?' 

'If I had brains I wouldn’t be here,' Bonello said. 

'That's pretty good, Tenente,’ Aymo said. 

'That's pretty good,’ I said. We were close to the 
bridge now. The sky had clouded over again and it 
was raining a little. The bridge looked long and solid. 
We climbed up the embankment. 

'Come one at a time,’ I said and started across the 
bridge. I watched the ties and the rails for any trip- 
wires or signs of explosive but I saw nothing. Down 
below the gaps in the ties the river ran muddy and fast. 
Ahead across the wet countryside I could see Udine in 
the rain. Across the bridge I looked back. Just up the 
river w^as another bridge. As I watched, a yellow mud- 
coloured motor-car crossed it. The sides of the bridge 
were high and the body of the car, once on, was out of 
sight. But I saw the heads of the driver, the man on 
the seat with him, and the tw^o men on the rear seat. 

Z21 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

They all wore German helmets. Then the car was over 
the bridge and out of sight behind the trees and the 
abandoned vehicles on the road. I waved to Aymo 
who was crossing and to the others to come on. I climbed 
dowTi and crouched beside the railway embankment. 
Aymo came down with me. 

^Did you see the car?’ I asked. 

^Xo. We were watching you.’ 

M German staff car crossed on the upper bridge.’ 

hA staff car?’ 

^Holy M^ryV 

The others came and we all crouched in the mud be- 
hind the embankment, looking across the rails at the 
bridge, the line of trees, the ditch and the road. 

‘Do you think we’re cut off then, Tenente?’ 

T don’t know. All I know is a German staff car went 
along that road.’ 

‘You don’t feel funny, Tenente? You haven’t got 
strange feelings in the head?’ 

‘Don’t be funny, Bonello.’ 

‘What about a drink?’ Piani asked. ‘If we’re cut 
off we might as well have a drink.’ He unhooked his 
canteen and uncorked it. 

‘Look! Look!’ Aymo said and pointed toward the 
road. Along the top of the stone bridge we could see 
German helmets moving. They were bent forward and 
moved smoothly, almost supernaturally, along. As 
they came off the bridge we saw them. They were 
bicycle troops. I saw the faces of the first two. They 
were ruddy and healthy-looking. Their helmets came 
low down over their foreheads and the side of their 
faces. Their carbines were clipped to the frame of the 

22Z 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

bicycles. Stick bonibs him,:; handle down thdr 

belts. Their helmets and their erey uniforms v.ere uet 
and they rode easily, looking ahead and to both sides. 
Thxme were tv^o-then four in line, then two, then a!«- 
inost a dozen; then another dozen -“then one alone. 
They did not talk but we could not have heard them 
because of the noise from the river. They were gone 
out of sight up the road. 

'Holy Alart'd Aymc srdd. 

'They were Germans,' Piar: said. 'Those weren't 
Austrians.’ 

'Why isn't there somebody here to stop them?' I 
said. 'Why haven’t they blown the bridge up? Why 
aren't there machine-guns along this embankment?' 

'You tell us, Tcnente,' Boneiio said. 

I was very’ ^ngry. 

'The whole bloody thing is crazy. Down below they 
blow up a little bridge. Here they leave a bridge on 
the main road. Where is evety’body? Don’t they try 
and stop them at all?’ 

Y^'ou tell us, Tenente/ Bonello said. I shut up. It 
was none of my business; all I had to do was to get to 
Pordenone with three ambulances. I had failed at that. 
All I had to do now was get to Pordenone. I probably 
could not even get to Udine. The hell I couldn't. The 
thing to do was to be calm and not get shot or captured. 

'Didn’t you have a canteen open?’ I asked Piani. 
He handed it to me. I took a long drink. 'We might 
as well start/ I said. 'There’s no hurry though. Do 
you want to eat something?’ 

'This is no place to stay/ Bonello said. 

'All right. We’ll start.’ 

'Should we keep on this side - out of sight?’ 

2Z3 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Well be better off on top. They may come along 
this bridge too. W’e don’t vrant them on top of us before 
we see them/ 

We walked along the railroad track. On both sides 
of us stretched the wet plain. Ahead across the plain 
was the hill of Udine. The roofs fell away from the 
castle on the hill. We could see the campanile and the 
clock-tower. There were many mulberrj^ trees in the 
fields. Ahead I saw a place where the rails were torn 
up. The ties had been dug out too and thrown down 
the embankment. 

'Down! down!’ Aynno said. We dropped down beside 
the embankment. There was another group of bicyclists 
passing along the road, I looked over the edge and saw 
them go on. 

'They saw us but they went on/ Aymo said. 

'We’ll get killed up there, Tenente,’ Bonello said. 

'They don’t want us/ I said, 'They’re after some- 
thing else. We’re in more danger if they should come 
on us suddenly.’ 

'Fd rather walk here out of sight,’ Bonello said. 

'All right. We’ll walk along the tracks.’ 

'Do you think we can get through?’ Aymo asked. 

'Sure. There aren’t very many of them yet. We’ll 
go through in the dark.’ 

'What was that staff car doing?’ 

'Christ knows/ I said. We kept on up the tracks. 
Bonello tired of walking in the mud of the embankment 
and came up with the rest of us. The railway moved 
south away from the highvray now and we could not 
see what passed along the road. A short bridge over 
a canal was blown up but we climbed across on what 
was left of the span. We heard firing ahead of us. 

224 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


We came up on the railway beyond the canai. It 
went oil straight toward the town across the low fields. 
We could see the line of the other railway ahead of us. 
To the north was the main road where we had seen the 
cyclists; to the south there was a small branch-road 
across the fields with thick trees on each side. I thought 
we had better cut to the south and work around the 
town that way and across country* toward Campoformio 
and the main road to the Tagliamento. We could avoid 
the main line of the retreat by keeping to the secondary* 
roads beyond Udine. I knew there were plenty of side- 
roads across the plain. I started down the embankment. 

^Come onf I said. We would make for the side- 
road and work to the south of the town. We all started 
down the embankment. A shot was fired at us from the 
side-road. The bullet went into the mud of the embank- 
ment. 

^Go on back/ I shouted. I started up the embank- 
ment, slipping in the mud. The drivers were ahead of 
me. I went up the embankment as fast as I could go. 
Two more shots came from the thick brush and Aymo, 
as he was crossing the tracks, lurched, tripped and fell 
face down. We pulled him down on the other side and 
turned him over. *His head ought to be uphill/ I said. 
Piani moved him around. He lay in the mud on the 
side of the embankment, his feet pointing downhill, 
breathing blood irregularly. The three of us squatted 
over him in the rain. He was hit low in the back of the 
neck and the bullet had ranged upward and come out 
under the right e}*e. He died while I was stopping up 
the two holes, Piani laid his head down, wiped at his face 
with a piece of the emergency dressing, then let it alone. 

‘The bastards,' he said. 
p 225 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘They weren’t Germans,’ I said. ‘There can’t be any 
Germans over there.’ 

‘Italians,’ Piani said, using the word as an epithet, 
‘ Italian! !’ Bonello said nothing. He was sitting beside 
Aymo, not looking at him. Piani picked up A;^Tno’s 
cap where it had rolled down the embankment and put 
it over his face. He took out his canteen. 

‘Do you want a drink?’ Piani handed Bonello the 
canteen. 

‘No,’ Bonello said. He turned to me. ‘That might 
have happened to us any time on the railway tracks.’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘It was because we started across the 
field.’ 

Bonello shook his head. ‘Aymo’s dead,’ he said. 
‘Who’s dead nest, Tenente? Where do we go now?’ 

‘Those were Italians that shot,’ I said. ‘They weren’t 
Germans.’ 

‘I suppose if they were Germans they’d have killed 
all of us,’ Bonello said. 

‘We are in more danger from Italians than Germans,’ 
I said. ‘The rear guard are afraid of everything. The 
Germans know what they’re after.’ 

‘You reason it out, Tenente,’ Bonello said. 

‘Where do we go now?’ Piani asked. 

‘We better lie up some place till it’s dark. If we could 
get south we’d be all right.’ 

‘They’d have to shoot us all to prove they were right 
the first time,’ Bonello said. ‘I’m not going to try 
them.’ 

‘We’ll find a place to lie up as near to Udine as we 
can get and then go through when it’s dark.’ 

‘Let’s go then,’ Bonello said. We went down the 
north side of the embankment. I looked back. Aymo 

226 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

!av in the niud within the angle of the embankment. He 
was quite small and his arms were by his side, his puttee- 
v/rapped legs and muddy boots together, his cap over 
his face. He looked very dead. It was raining. I had 
li]:ed him as well as any one I ever knew. I had his 
papers in my pocket and would write to his family. 

Ahead across the fields was a farmhouse. There were 
trees around it and the farm buildings were built against 
the house. There was a balcony along the second floor 
held up by columns. 

AVe better keep a little way apart/ I said. Til go 
ahead.’ I started toward the farmhouse. There was a 
path across the field. 

Crossing the field, I did not know but that someone 
would fire on us from the trees near the farmhouse or 
from the farmhouse itself. I walked toward it, seeing 
it veiy'^ clearly. The balcony of the second floor merged 
into the barn and there was hay coming out between 
the columns. The courtyard was of stone blocks and 
all the trees were dripping with the rain. There was a 
big empty two-wheeled cart, the shafts tipped high up 
in the rain, I came to the courtyard, crossed it, and 
stood under the shelter of the balcony. The door of the 
house was open and I went in. Bonello and Piani came 
in after me. It was dark inside. I went back to the 
kitchen. There were ashes of a fire on the big open 
hearth. The pots hung over the ashes, but they were 
empty. I looked around but I could not find amrthing 
to eat. 

AVe ought to lie up in the bam/ I said. you 

think you could find anything to eat, Piani, and bring 
it up there?’ 

Til look,’ Piani said. 

ZZ7 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Fil look too,’ Bonelio said. 

‘A!i right,’ I said. T’il go up and look at the bam.’ 
I found a stone stairway that went up from the stable 
underneath. The stable smelt dn,- and pleasant in the 
rain. The cattle were all gone, probably driven off when 
they left. The barn was half full of hay. There were two 
windows in the roof, one was blocked with boards, 
the other was a narrow dormer window on the north 
side. There was a chute so that hay might be pitched 
down to the cattle. Beams crossed the opening down 
into the main floor where the hay carts drove in when 
the hay was hauled in to be pitched up. I heard the 
rain on the roof and smelled the hay, and, when I went 
down, the clean smell of dried dung in the stable. We 
could pry a board loose and see out of the south window 
down into the courtyard. The other window looked 
out on the field toward the north. We could get out of 
either window onto the roof and down, or go down 
the hay chute if the stairs were impracticable. It was 
a big bam and we could hide in the hay if we heard any- 
one. It seemed like a good place. I was sure we could 
have gotten through to the south if they had not fired 
on us. It was impossible that there were Germans 
there. They were coming from the north and down 
the road from Cividale. They could not have come 
through from the south. The Italians were even more 
dangerous. They were frightened and firing on any- 
thing they saw. Last night on the retreat we had heard 
that there had been many Germans in Italian uniforms 
mixing with the retreat in the north. I did not believe 
it. That was one of those things you always heard in 
the war. It was one of the things the enemy always 
did to you. You did not know anyone who went over 

228 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


in German uniform to confuse them. Maybe they 
did but it sounded difficult. I did not believe the 
Germans did it. I did not believe they had to. There 
was no need to confuse our retreat. The size of the 
army and the fewness of the roads did that. Nobody 
gave any orders, let alone Germans. Still, they would 
shoot us for Germans. They shot Aymo. The hay 
smelled good and lying in a barn in the hay took away 
all the years in between. We had lain in hay and 
talked and shot sparrows with an air-rifle when they 
perched in the triangle cut high up in the wall of the 
barn. The bam was gone now and one year they had 
cut the hemlock woods and there were only stumps, 
dried tree-tops, branches and fireweed where the woods 
had been. A"ou could not go back. If you did not go 
forward what happened? You never got back to Alilan. 
And if you got back to Milan what happened? I listened 
to the firing to the north toward Udine. I could hear 
machine-gun firing. There was no shelling. That was 
something. They must have gotten some troops along 
the road. I looked down in the half-light of the hay 
barn and saw Piani standing on the hauling floor. He had 
a long sausage, a jar of something and two bottles of 
wine under his arm, 

‘Come up,’ I said. ‘There is the ladder.’ Then I 
realized that I should help him with the things and 
went down. I was vague in the head from lying in the 
hay. I had been nearly asleep. 

‘Where’s Bonello?’ I asked. 

Til tell you,’ Piani said. We went up the ladder. 
Up on the hay we set the things down. Piani took out 
his knife vith the corkscrew' and drew the cork of a 
wine-bottle. 

2^9 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'They have secJing-vax on it/ he said. Tt must be 
good/ He smiied. 

"Where’s Bonelior’ I asked. 

Piani looked at me. 

"He went away, Tenente,’ he said. "He wanted to be 

a prisoner.’ 

I did not say anj^iliing. 

"He was afraid we would get killed.’ 

I held the bottle of wine and did not say anything. 

"You see we don’t believe in the war anjW'ay, Tenente.’ 

‘Why didn’t yon go?’ I asked. 

T did not want to leave you.’ 

‘Where did he go?’ 

‘I don’t know, Tenente. He vrent away.’ 

‘Ail right,’ I said. ‘Will you cut the sausage?’ 

Piani looked at me in the half-Kght. 

‘I cut it while we were talking,’ he said. We sat in 
the hay and ate the sausage and drank the wine. It 
must have been wine they had saved for a w^edding. It 
was so old that it was losing its colour. 

‘You look out of this window, Luigi,’ I said. ‘I’ll go 
look out the other window.’ 

We had each been drinking out of one of the bottles 
and I took my bottle with me and went over too and lay 
flat on the hay and looked out the narrow window at 
the wet country. I do not know what I expected to 
see, but I did not see anyi:hing except the fields and the 
bare mulberry trees and the rain falling, I drank the 
wine and it did not make me feel good. They had kept 
it too long and it had gone to pieces and lost its quality 
and colour. I watched it get dark outside; the darkness 
came very quickly. It w^ould be a black night with the 
rain. When it was dark there was no use watching any 

230 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

r-iorc% so I vrent over to Piani. He was lying asleep and 
I did not wake him but sat down beside him for a w^hile. 
i!e a big man and he slept heavily. After a while I 
woke him and we started. 

That was a very strange night. I do not know what 
I had expected - death perhaps, and shooting in the dark, 
and running, but nothing happened. We waited, lying 
flat beyond the ditch along the main road wLile a German 
battalion passed, then when they were gone we crossed 
the road and went on to the north. We were very close 
to Germans twice in the rain but they did not see us. 
We got past the town to the north without seeing any 
Italians, then after a while came on the main channels 
of the retreat and walked all night toward the Tagliamento. 
I had not realized how gigantic the retreat was. The 
whole country’ was moving, as well as the army. We 
walked all night, making better time than the vehicles. 
My leg ached and I was tired but we made good time. 
It seemed so silly for Bonello to have decided to be 
taken prisoner. There was no danger. We had walked 
through two armies without incident. If Aymo had 
not been killed there would never have seemed to be 
any danger. No one had bothered us when we were 
in plain sight along the railway. The killing came sud- 
denly and unreasonably. I wondered where Bonello 
was. 

'How do YOU feel, Tenente?’ Piani asked. We were 

going along the side of a road crowded with vehicles 
and troops. 

‘Fine.’ 

‘I’m tired of this walking.’ 

‘Well, all w’e have to do is walk now. We don’t have 
to worry.’ 


231 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

^Bonello was a fool/ 

'He was a fool all right.’ 

'What will you do about him, Tenente?’ 

T don’t know.’ 

'Can’t you just put him down as taken prisoner?’ 

T don’t know.’ 

'You see if the war went on they w'ould make bad 
trouble for his family.’ 

'The war won’t go on,’ a soldier said, 'We’re going 
home. The war is over.’ 

'Eveiy'body’s going home.’ 

'We’re ail going home.’ 

'Come on, Tenente,’ Piani said. He wanted to get 
past them. 

'Tenente? Who’s a Tenente? A basso git ufficiali! 
Down with the officers!’ 

Piani took me by the arm. T better call you by your 
name/ he said. ‘They might try and make trouble. 
They’ve shot some officers.’ We worked up past them. 

T won’t make a report that will make trouble for his 
family.’ I went on with our conversation. 

'If the war is over it makes no difference,’ Piani said. 
'But I don’t believe it’s over. It’s too good that it should 
be over.’ 

'We’ll know pretty soon,’ I said. 

'I don’t believe it’s over. They all think it’s over but 
I don’t believe it.’ 

'Evviva la PaceP a^oldier shouted out. 'We’re going 
home,’ 

'It would be fine if we all went home,’ Piani said. 
'W'ouldn’t you like to go home?’ 

'Yes.’ 

'We’ll never go. I don’t think it’s over.’ 

232 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'Andimno a casaP a soldier shouted. 

^They throw away their rifles/ Piani said. 'They 
take them off and drop them down while theyTe marching. 
Then they shout.’ 

'They ought to keep their rifles.’ 

'They think if they thro^v away their rifles they can’t 
make them fight.’ 

In the dark and the rain, making our way along the 
side of the road I could see that many of the troops 
still had their rifles. They stuck up above the capes. 

'What brigade are you?’ an officer called out. 

'‘Brigata di Pace,^ someone shouted. 'Peace Brigade!’ 
The officer said nothing. 

'What does he say? What does the officer say?’ 

'Down with the officer. Evviz'a la PaceP 

'Come on/ Piani said. We passed two British am- 
bulances, abandoned in the block of vehicles. 

'They’re from Gorizia/ Piani said. 'I know the cars.’ 

'They got further than we did.’ 

‘They started earlier.’ 

'I wonder where the drivers are?’ 

'Up ahead probably.’ 

'The Germans have stopped outside Udine/ I said. 
'These people wdll all get across the river.’ 

'Yes/ Piani said. 'That's why I think the w’ar will 
go on.’ 

'The Germans could come on/ I said. 'I wwder 
wh}" they don’t come on.’ 

T don’t knowu I don’t know' anything about this kind 
of w'ar.’ 

'They have to W'ait for their transport I suppose.’ 

'I don’t know'/ Piani said. Alone he w'as much gentler. 
When he w'as with the others he w'as a very rough talker, 

333 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

^Are you married, Luigi?’ 

'You know I am married.’ 

Ts that why you did not want to be a prisoner?’ 

'That is one reason. Are you married, Tenente?’ 

'Xo.’ 

'Neither is Bonello.’ 

'You can’t tell anything by a man’s being married. 
But I should think a married man would want to get 
back to his wife,’ I said. I -would be glad to talk about 
wives. 

'Yes.’ 

'How^ are your feet?’ 

'They’re sore enough.’ 

Before daylight we reached the bank of the Taglia- 
mento and followed down along the flooded river to the 
bridge where all the traffic was crossing. 

'They ought to be able to hold at this river,’ Piani 
said. In the dark the flood looked high. The water 
swirled and it was wide. The wooden bridge was 
nearly three-quarters of a mile across, and the river 
that usually ran in narrow channels in the wide stony 
bed far below the bridge, was close under the wooden 
planking. We went along the bank and then worked 
our way into the crowd that were crossing the bridge. 
Crossing slowly in the rain a few feet above the flood, 
pressed tight in the crowd, the box of an artillery caisson 
just ahead, I looked over the side and watched the 
river. Now that we could not go our own pace I felt 
very tired. There was no exhilaration in crossing the 
bridge. I wnndered what it would be like if a plane 
bombed it in the daytime. 

'Piani,’ I said. 

'Here I am, Tenente.’ He was a little ahead in the 

^34 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

jam. Xo one was talking. They were ail trying to get 
across as soon as they could: thinking only of that. We 
were almost across. At the far end of the bridge there 
were officers and carabinieri standing on both sides 
flashing lights. I saw them silhouetted against the 
sky-line. As we came close to them I saw one of the 
officers point to a man in the column. A carabiniere 
went in after him and came out holding the man by the 
arm. He took him away from the road. We came 
almost opposite them. The officers were scmtmizing 
every one in the column, sometimes speaking to each 
other, going forward to flash a light in someone face. 
They took someone else out just before we came 
opposite. I saw the man. He was a lieutenant-colonel. 
I saw the stars in the box on his sleeve as they flashed 
a light on him. His hair was grey and he was short 
and fat. The carabiniere pulled him in behind the 
line of officers. As we came opposite I saw one or two 
of them look at me. Then one pointed at me and spoke 
to a carabiniere. I saw the carabiniere start for me, 
come through the edge of the column toward me, then 
felt him take me by the collar. 

‘What’s the matter with you?’ I said and hit him in 
the face. I saw his face under the hat, upturned mous- 
taches, and blood coining down his cheek. Another one 
dived in toward us. 

‘What’s the matter with your’ I said- He did not 
answer. He was watching a chance to grab me. I put 
my arm behind me to loosen my pistol. 

‘Don’t you know you can’t touch an officer?’ 

The other one grabbed me from behind and pulled 
my arm up so that it twisted in the socket. I turned 
with him and the other one grabbed me around the 

235 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

neck. I kicked his shins and got my left knee into his 
groin. 

'Shoot him if he resists/ I heard someone say. 

'What’s the meaning of this?’ I tried to shout but 
my voice was not very loud. They had me at the side 
of the road now. 

'Shoot him if he resists/ an officer said. 'Take him 
over back.’ 

'Who are you?’ 

'You’ll find out.’ 

'Who are you?’ 

'Battle police/ another officer said. 

'Why don’t you ask me to step over instead of having 
one of these airplanes grab me?’ 

They did not answer. They did not have to answer. 
They w^ere battle police. 

'Take him back there with the others/ the first officer 
said. 'You see. He speaks Italian with an accent.’ 

'So do you, you bastard/ I said. 

'Take him back with the others/ the first officer 
said. They took me dowm behind the line of officers 
below the road toward a group of people in a field by 
the river bank. As we walked toward them shots were 
fired. I saw flashes of the rifles and heard the reports. 
We came up to the group. There were four officers 
standing together, with a man in front of them with a 
carabiniere on each side of him, A group of men were 
standing guarded by carabinieri. Four other carabinieri 
stood near the questioning officers, leaning on their 
carbines. They were wide-hatted carabinieri. The two 
wLo had me shoved me in with the group waiting to be 
questioned. I looked at the man the officers were question- 
ing. He was the fat, grey-haired, little lieutenant-colonel 

236 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


they had taken out of the column. The questioners had 
all the efficiency, coldness and command of themselves 
of Italians who are firing and are not being fired on. 

"Your Brigade?’ 

He told them, 

‘Regiment?’ 

He told them. 

‘Why are you not with your regiment?’ 

He told them. 

‘Do you not know that an officer should be with his 
troops?’ 

He did. 

That was all. Another officer spoke. 

Tt is you and such as you that have let the barbarians 
on to the sacred soil of the fatherland.’ 

T beg your pardon/ said the lieutenant-colonel. 

Tt is because of treacheiy^ such as yours that we have 
lost the fruits of victory.’ 

‘Have you ever been in a retreat?’ the lieutenant- 
colonel asked. 

‘Italy should never retreat.’ 

We stood there in the rain and listened to this. We 
were facing the officers and the prisoner stood in front 
and a little to one side of us. 

Tf you are going to shoot me/ the lieutenant-colonel 
said, ‘please shoot me at once without further questioning. 
The questioning is stupid.’ He made the sign of the 
cross. The officers spoke together. One wrote something 
on a pad of paper. 

‘Abandoned his troops, ordered to be shot/ he said. 

Two carabinieri took the lieutenant-colonel to the 
river bank. He walked in the rain, an old man with 
his hat off, a carabiniere on either side. I did not watch 

237 



A FAREWELL TO ARAIS 

them shoot him but I heard the shots. They were 
-'-c-stior-iur someone else. This officer too was separated 
from his troops. He was not allowed to make an ex- 
He cried when they read the sentence from 
the pad of paper and cried while they led him off, and 
they were raesti'mdr.r another when they shot him. They 
made a point of being intent on questioning the next 
man while the man who had been questioned before was 
being shot. In this way there was obviously nothing they 
could do about it. I did not know whether I should wait 
to be cue? tinned or make a break now. I was obviously 
a German in Italian uniform. I saw how" their minds 
worked; if they had minds and if they worked. They 
were all young men and they were saving their countr}u 
The second army was being reformed beyond the 
Tagliamento. They were executing officers of the rank 
of major and above who were separated from their troops. 
They were also dealing summarily with German agitators 
in Italian uniform. They wore steel helmets. Only two 
of us had steel helmets. Some of the carabinieri had 
them. The other carabinieri wore the wide hat. Air- 
planes we called them. We stood in the rain and were 
taken out one at a time to be questioned and shot. So 
far they had shot every one they had questioned. The 
questioners had that beautiful detachment and devotion 
to stern justice of men dealing in death without being in 
any danger of it. They were questioning a full colonel of 
a line regiment. Three more officers had just been put 
in with us. 

WTiere was his regiment? 

I looked at the carabinieri. They were looking at the 
newcomers. The others were looking at the colonel, I 
ducked down, pushed between two men, and ran for 

238 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


the river, my head down. I tripped at the edge and 
went in with a splash. The water was very cold and I 
stayed under as long as I could. I could feel the current 
swirl me and I stayed under until I thought I could 
never come up. The minute I came up I took a breath 
and went down again. It was easy to stay under with 
so much clothing and my boots. When I came up the 
second time I saw a piece of timber ahead of me and 
reached it and held on with one hand. I kept my head 
behind it and did not even look over it. I did not want 
to see the bank. There were shots when I ran and shots 
when I came up the first time. I heard them when I was 
almost above water. There w*ere no shots now. The 
piece of timber swning in the current and I held it with 
one hand. I looked at the bank. It seemed to be going 
by very fast. There was much wood in the stream. The 
water w’as very cold. We passed the brush of an island 
above the water. I held on to the timber with both hands 
and let it take me along. The shore w^as out of sight^now. 


CHAPTER 31 


You do not know’ liow' long you are in a river when 
the current moves swiftly. It seems a long time and it 
may be very short. The water was cold and in flood 
and many things passed that had been floated off the 
banks when the river rose. I was lucky to have a hea\y 
timber to hold on to, and I lay in the icy water with 
my chin on the wood, holding as easily as I could with 
both hands. I w’as afraid of cramps and I hoped we 

239 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


would move toward the shore. "We went down the 
river in a long ciir^'e. It %vas beginning to be light 
enough so I could see the bushes along the shore-line. 
There was a brash island ahead and the current moved 
toward the shore. I wondered if I should take off my 
boots and clothes and try' to swim ashore, but decided 
not to. I had never thought of anything but that I 
would reach the shore some way, and I would be in a 
bad position if I landed barefoot. I had to get to Alestre 
some way. 

I watched the shore come close, then swing away, 
then come closer again. We were floating more slowly. 
The shore was very close now. I could see twigs on 
the willow bush. The timber swung slowly so that the 
bank was behind me and I knew w'e w'ere in an eddy. 
We w'ent slowiy around. As I saw the bank again, very 
close now', I tried holding with one arm and kicking 
and sw’imming the timber tow'ard the bank wdth the 
other, but I did not bring it any closer. I was afraid 
we would move out of the eddy and, holding with one 
hand, I drew up my feet so they wure against the side 
of the timber and shoved hard toward the bank. I 
could see the brush, but even with my momentum and 
sw'imming as hard as I could, the current was taking me 
awuy. I thought then I wuuld drowm because of my 
boots, but I thrashed and fought through the water, 
and when I looked up the bank was coming toward me, 
and I kept thrashing and sw^imming in a heavy-footed 
panic until I reached it. I hung to the willow branch 
and did not have strength to pull myself up but I knew 
I w'ould not drowm now. It had never occurred to me 
on the timber that I might drown. I felt hollow and 
sick in my stomach and chest from the effort, and I 

240 



A FAREWELL TO AR:^I3 


held to the branches and waited. When the sick feeling 
w'as gone I pulled in to the wnllow bushes and rested 
again, my arms around some brush, holding tight with 
my hands to the branches. Then I crawled out, pushed 
on through the willows and onto the bank. It was half- 
daylight and I saw no one. I lay flat on the bank and 
heard the river and the rain. 

After a w^'MIe I got up and started along the bank, 
I knew there was no bridge across the river until Lati- 
sana. I thought I might be opposite San Vito. I began 
to think out what I should do. xAhead there was a ditch 
running into the river. I went toward it. So far I had 
seen no one and I sat down by some bushes along the 
bank of the ditch and took off my shoes and emptied 
them of water. I took off my coat, took my wallet with 
my papers and my money all wet in it out of the inside 
pocket and then wrung the coat out. I took off my 
trousers and wrung them too, then my shirt and under- 
clothing. I slapped and rubbed myself and then dressed 
again, I had lost my cap. 

Before I put on my coat I cut the cloth stars off my 
sleeves and put them in the inside pocket with my 
money. IMy money was w^et but was all right. I counted 
it. There were three thousand and some lire, Aly 
clothes felt wet and clammy and I slapped my arms to 
keep the circulation going. I had woollen underwear and 
I did not think I w'ould catch cold if I kept moving* 
They had taken my pistol at the road and I put the 
holster under my coat. I had no cape and it was cold 
in the rain. I started up the bank of the canal. It was 
daylight and the country was wet, low and dismal look- 
ing. The fields were bare and wet; a long way away 
I could see a campanile rising out of the plain, I came 
Q 241 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

up onto a road. xAhead I saw some troops coming down 
the road. I limped along the side of the road and they 
passed me and paid no attention to me. They w'ere 
a machine-gun detachment going up toward the river. 
I went on down the road. 

That day I crossed the Venetian plain. It is a low 
level countiy and under the rain it is even flatter. To- 
ward the sea there are salt marshes and very few roads. 
The roads all go along the river mouths to the sea and 
to cross the country you must go along the paths beside 
the canals. I was working across the country from the 
north to the south and had crossed two railway lines 
and many roads and finally I came out at the end of a 
path onto a railway line where it ran beside a marsh. 
It was the main line from Venice to Trieste, with a 
high solid embankment, a solid roadbed and double 
track. Dowm the track a way w^as a flag-station and 
I could see soldiers on guard. Up the line there was a 
bridge over a stream that flowed into the marsh. I 
could see a guard too at the bridge. Crossing the fields 
to the north I had seen a train pass on this railroad, 
visible a long way across the flat plain, and I thought 
a train might come from Portogruaro. I watched the 
guards and lay down on the embankment so that I 
could see both ways along the track. The guard at the 
bridge walked a little way up the line toward where I 
lay, then turned and went back toward the bridge. I lay, 
and was hungry, and waited for the train. The one I 
had seen was so long that the engine moved it very 
slowly, and I w^as sure I could get aboard it. After I 
had almost given up hoping for one I saw a train com- 
ing. The engine, coming straight on, grew" larger slowly, 
I looked at the guard at the bridge. He was walking 

242 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


on the near side of the bridge but on the other side of 
the track. That would put him out of sight when the 
train passed. I watched the engine come nearer. It 
was working hard. I could see there were many cars. 
I knew there would be guards on the train, and I tried 
to see where they were, but, keeping out of sight, I 
could not. The engine was almost to tvhere I was lying. 
When it came opposite, working and puffing even on the 
level, and I saw the engineer pass, I stood up and 
stepped up close to the passing cars. If the guards 
were watching I was a less suspicious object standing 
beside the track. Several closed freight-cars passed. 
Then I saw a low open car of the sort they call gondolas 
coming, covered with canvas. I stood until it had al- 
most passed, then jumped and caught the rear hand- 
rods and pulled up. I crawled down between the gon- 
dola and the shelter of the high freight-car behind. I 
did not think anyone had seen me. I was holding to 
the hand-rods and crouching low, my feet on the coup- 
ling. We were almost opposite the bridge. I remem- 
bered the guard. As we passed him he looked at me. 
He was a boy and his helmet was too big for him. I 
stared at him contemptuously and he looked away. He 
thought I had something to do with the train. 

We were past. I saw him still looking uncomfort- 
able, watching the other cars pass and I stopped to see 
how the canvas was fastened. It had grummets and was 
laced down at the edge with cord. I took out my knife, 
cut the cord and put my arm under. There were hard 
bulges under the canvas that tightened in the rain. I 
looked up and ahead. There \vas a guard on the freight- 
car ahead but he was looking forward. I let go of the 
hand-rails and ducked under the canvas. Aly forehead 

H3 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


hit something that gave me a violent bump and I felt 
blood on my face but I crawled on in and lay flat. Then 
I turned around and fastened down the canvas. 

I was in under the canvas with guns. They smelled 
cleanly of oil and grease. I lay and listened to the rain 
on the canvas and the clicking of the car ov'er the rails. 
There was a little light came through and I lay and 
looked at the guns. They had their canvas jackets on. 
I thought they must have been sent ahead from the 
third army. The bump on my forehead was swollen 
and I stopped the bleeding by lying still and letting it 
coagulate, then picked away the dried blood except over 
the cut. It was nothing. I had no handkerchief, but 
feeling with my fingers I w'ashed away w’here the dried 
blood had been, with rain-w’ater that dripped from the 
canvas, and wiped it clean with the sleeve of my coat. 
I did not want to look conspicuous. I knew I would 
have to get out before they got to Mestre because they 
would be taking care of these guns. They had no guns 
to lose or forget about. I w^as terrifically hungry. 


CHAPTER 32 

Lying on the floor of the flat-car with the guns beside 
me under the canvas I was wet, cold, and very hungry. 
Finally I rolled over and lay flat on my stomach with 
my head on my arms. My knee was stiff, but it had been 
very satisfactory. Valentini had done a fine job. I had 
done half the retreat on foot and swum part of the 
Tagliamento with his knee. It was his knee all right. 

244 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


The other knee was mine. Doctors did things to yon 
and then it was not your body any more. The head 
was mine^ and the inside of the belly. It was very hungry 
in there. I could feel it turn over on itself. The head 
was mine 5 but not to use, not to think with; only to 
remember and not too much remember. 

I could remember Catherine but I knew I would get 
crazy if I thought about her when I was not sure yet I 
would see her, so I would not think about her, only 
about her a little, only about her with the car going 
slowly and clickingly, and some light through the canvas, 
and my lying with Catherine on the floor of the car. 
Hard as the floor of the car to lie not thinking only 
feeling, having been away too long, the clothes wet and 
the floor moving only a little each time and lonesome 
inside and alone with wet clothing and hard floor for 
a wife. 

You did not love the floor of a flat-car nor guns with 
canvas jackets and the smell of vaselined metal or a 
canvas that rain leaked through, although it is very 
fine under a canvas and pleasant with guns; but you 
loved someone else whom now you knew was not even 
to be pretended there; you seeing now veiy clearly and 
coldly - not so coldly as clearly and emptily. You saw 
emptily, lying on your stomach, having been present 
when one army moved back and another came forward. 
You had lost your cars and your men as a floorwalker 
loses the stock of his department in a fire. There was, 
however, no insurance. You were out of it now. You 
had no more obligation. If they shot floorwalkers after 
a fire in the department store because they spoke with 
an accent they had always had, then certainly the 
floorw'alkers would not be expected to return when the 

245 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

store opened again for business. They might seek other 
employment; if there was any other employment and 
the police did not get them. 

Anger was washed aw^ay in the river along with any 
obligation. Although that ceased when the carabiniere 
put his hands on my collar, I would like to have had 
the uniform off although I did not care much about the 
outward forms. I had taken off the stars, but that was 
for convenience. It was no point of honour. I was not 
against them. I was through. I wished them all the 
luck. There were the good ones, and the brave ones, and 
the calm ones and the sensible ones, and they deserved 
it. But it was not my show any more and I wished this 
bloody train would get to Mestre and I would eat and 
stop thinking. I w^ould have to stop. 

Piani w^ould tell them they had shot me. They went 
through the pockets and took the papers of the people 
they shot. They would not have my papers. They might 
call me drowned. I wondered what they would hear in 
the States. Dead from wounds and other causes. Good 
Christ, I was hungry. I wondered what had become of 
the priest at the mess. And Rinaldi. He was probably 
at Pordenone. If they had not gone further back. Well, 
I would never see him now. I w^ould never see any of 
them now\ That life was over. I did not think he had 
syphilis. It Avas not a serious disease anyway if you 
took it in time, they said. But he would worry. 
I would worry too if I had it. Anyone would 
worry, 

I was not made to think, I was made to eat. My 
God, yes. Eat and drink and sleep with Catherine. 
To-night maybe. No, that was impossible. But to- 
morrow night, and a good meal and sheets and never 

246 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


going away again except together. Probably have to 
go damned quickly. She would go. I knew she would 
go. When would we go? That was something to think 
about. It was getting dark. I lay and thought where 
we would go. There were many places. 







CHAPTER 33 


I DROPPED off the train in Milan as it slowed to come 
into the station early in the morning before it was light, 
I crossed the track and came out between some buildings 
and down onto the street. A wine shop was open and I 
went in for some coffee. It smelled of early morning, 
of swept dust, spoons in coffee-glasses and the wet 
circles left by wine-glasses. The proprietor was behind 
the bar. Two soldiers sat at a table. I stood at the bar 
and drank a glass of coffee and ate a piece of bread . 
The coffee was grey with milk, and I skimmed the milk 
scum off the top with a piece of bread. The proprietor 
looked at me. 

‘You want a glass of grappa?’ 

‘No thanks.’ 

‘On me,’ he said and poured a small glass and pushed 
it toward me. ‘What’s happening at the front?’ 

‘I would not know.’ 

‘They are drunk,’ he said, moving his hand toward 
the two soldiers, I could believe him. They looked 
drunk. 

‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘what is happening at the front?’ 

T would not know about the front.’ 

‘I saw you come down the wall. You came off the 
train.’ 

‘There is a big retreat.’ 

‘I read the papers. What happens? Is it over?’ 

‘I don’t think so.’ 


251 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


He filled the glass with grappa from a short bottle, 

Tf you are in trouble/ he said, T can keep you/ 

T am not in trouble/ 

Tf you are in trouble stay here with me/ 

'Where does one stay?’ 

Tn the building. Many stay here. Any who are in 
trouble stay here/ 

'Are many in trouble?’ 

Tt depends on the trouble. You are a South American?’ 
'Xo/ 

'Speak Spanish?’ 

'A little/ 

He wiped off the bar. 

Tt is hard now to leave the countiy^ but in no way 
impossible/ 

T have no wish to leave.’ 

'You can stay here as long as you want. You will see 
what sort of man I am/ 

T have to go this morning but I will remember the 
address to return.’ 

He shook his head. 'You won’t come back if you 
talk like that. I thought you were in real trouble,’ 

'I am in no trouble. But I value the address of a 
friend.’ 

I put a ten-lira note on the bar to pay for the coffee. 
‘Have a grappa with me/ I said. 

Tt is not necessary/ 

'Have one.’ 

He poured the two glasses. 

'Remember/ he said. ‘Come here. Do not let other 
people take you in. Here you are all right.’ 

T am sure.’ 

'You are sure?’ 


252 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


^Yes; 

He was serious. ‘Then let me tell you one thing. 
Do not go about with that coat.’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘On the sleeves it shows very plainly where the 
stars have been cut aw’^ay. The cloth is a different 

colour.’ 

I did not say anything, 

Tf you have no papers I can give you papers.’ 

‘What papers?’ 

‘Leave papers.’ 

T have no need for papers. I have papers.’ 

‘All right/ he said. ‘But if you need papers I can 
get what you wish.’ 

‘How much are such papers?’ 

‘It depends on what they are. The price is reasonable.’ 
T don’t need any now.’ 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

T’m all right,’ I said. 

When I went out he said, ‘Don’t forget that I am 
your friend.’ 

‘No.’ 

‘I will see you again/ he said. 

‘Good/ I said. 

Outside I kept away from the station, where there 
were military police, and picked up a cab at the edge 
of the little park. I gave the driver the address of the 
hospital. At the hospital I went to the porter’s lodge. 
His wife embraced me. He shook my hand. 

‘You are back. You are safe.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Have you had breakfast?’ 

‘Yes/ ' 


253 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'How are yoUj Tenente? How are you?’ the wife 
asked. 

'Fine.’ 

'Won't you have breakfast with us?’ 

'X05 thank you. Tell me is Aliss Barkley here at the 
hospital now?’ 

'Miss Barkley?’ 

'The English lady nurse.’ 

'His girl/ the wife said. She patted my arm and 
smiled. 

'Xo/ the porter said. 'She is away.’ 

i\Iy heart went down. 'You are sure? I mean the 
tall blonde English young lady.’ 

'I am sure. She is gone to Stresa.’ 

'When did she go?’ 

'She went two days ago with the other lady English.’ 

'Good/ I said. 'I wish you to do something for me. 
Do not tell any one you have seen me. It is very im- 
portant.’ 

'I won’t tell anyone,’ the porter said. I gave him a 
ten-lira note. He pushed it away. 

'I promise you I will tell no one/ he said. 'I don’t 
want any money.’ 

'WTiat can we do for you, Signor Tenente?’ his wife 
asked. 

'Only that/ I said. 

'We are dumb/ the porter said. 'You will let me know 
an}i:hing I can do?’ 

'Yes/ I said. 'Good-bye. I will see you again.’ 

They stood in the door, looking after me. 

I got into the cab and gave the driver the address of 
Simmons, one of the men I knew who was studying 
singing. 


^54 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Simmons lived a long way out in the town toward 
the Porta Magenta. He was still in bed and sleepy when 
I went to see him. 

‘You get up aw'fully early, Henry,’ he said. 

‘I came in on the early train.’ 

‘What’s all this retreat? Were you at the front? 
Will you have a cigarette? They’re in that box on the 
table.’ It was a big room with a bed beside the wall, 
a piano over on the far side and a dresser and table. 
I sat on a chair by the bed. Simmons sat propped up 
by the pillows and smoked. 

T’m in a jam, Sim,’ I said. 

‘So am I,’ he said. ‘I’m always in a jam. Won’t you 
smoke?' 

‘Xo,’ I said. ‘What’s the procedure in going to 
Switzerland?’ 

‘For you? The Italians wouldn’t let you out of the 
countiy.’ 

‘Yes. I know that. But the Swiss. What will they 
do?’ 

‘They intern you.’ 

‘I know. But what’s the mechanics of it?’ 

‘Nothing. It’s very simple. You can go anywhere. 
I think you just have to report or something. ’'vYhy? 
Are you fleeing the police?’ 

‘Nothing definite yet.’ 

‘Don’t tell me if you don’t want. But it would be 
interesting to hear. Nothing happens here. I was a 
great flop at Piacenza.’ 

‘I’m awfully sorry.’ 

‘Oh, yes - 1 went very badly. I sang w'ell too. I’m 
going to try it again at the Lyrico here.’ 

‘I’d like to be there.’ 


25 .“; 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘You’re awfully polite. You aren’t in a bad mess, are 
your’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘Don’t tell me if you don’t want. How do you happen 
to be away from the bloody front?’ 

‘I think I’m through with it.’ 

‘Good boy. I always knew you had sense. Can I 
help you any way?’ 

‘You’re awfully busy.’ 

‘Xot a bit of it, my dear Henry. Not a bit of it. I’d be 
happy to do anj-thing.’ 

‘You’re about my size. Would you go out and buy 
me an outfit of civilian clothes? I’ve clothes but they’re 
all at Rome.’ 

‘You did live there, didn’t you? It’s a filthy place. 
How did you ever live there?’ 

‘I wanted to be an architect.’ 

‘That’s no place for that. Don’t buy clothes. I’ll 
give you all the clothes you want. I’ll fit you out so 
you’ll be a great success. Go in that dressing-room. 
There’s a closet. Take anything you want. My dear 
fellow, you don’t want to buy clothes.’ 

‘I’d rather buy them, Sim.’ 

‘My dear fellow, it’s easier for me to let you have 
them than go out and buy them. Have you got a pass- 
port? You w’on’t get far without a passport.’ 

‘Yes. I’ve still got my passport.’ 

‘Then get dressed, my dear fellow, and off to old 
Helvetia.’ 

‘It’s not that simple. I have to go up to Stresa first.’ 

‘Ideal, my dear fellow. You just row a boat across. 
If I wasn’t trying to sing, I’d go with you. I’ll go yet.’ 

‘You could take up yodelling.’ 

256 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Aly dear fellow, I’ll take up yodelling yet. I really 
can sing though. That’s the strange part.’ 

T’ll bet you can sing.’ 

He lay back in bed smoking a cigarette. 

‘Don’t bet too much. But I can sing though. It’s 
damned funny, but I can. I like to sing. Listen.’ He 
roared into ‘Africana,’ his neck swelling, the veins stand- 
ing out. ‘I can sing,’ he said. ‘Whether they like it 
or not.’ I looked out of the window. ‘I’ll go down and 
let my cab go.’ 

‘Come back up, my dear fellow, and we’ll have break- 
fast.’ He stepped out of bed, stood straight, took a 
deep breath and commenced doing bending exercises. 
I went downstairs and paid off the cab. 


CHAPTER 34 


In civilian clothes I felt a masquerader. I had been 
in uniform a long time and I missed the feeling of 
being held by your clothes. The trousers felt very 
floppy. I had bought a ticket at Alilan for Stresa. I 
had also bought a new hat. I could not wear Sim’s 
hat but his clothes were fine. They smelled of tobacco 
and as I sat in the compartment and looked out the win- 
dow the new hat felt very new and the clothes very old. 
I myself felt as sad as the wet Lombard country that 
was "outside through the window. There were some 
aviators in the compartment who did not think much 
of me. They avoided looking at me and were very 
scornful of a" civilian my age. I did not feel insulted. 

R 257 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

In the old days I would have insulted them and picked 
a fight. They got off at Gallarate and I was glad to be 
alone. I had the paper but I did not read it because I 
did not want to read about the war. I was going to 
forget the war. I had made a separate peace. I felt 
damned lonely and was glad when the train got to 
Stresa. 

At the station I had expected to see the porters from 
the hotels but there was no one. The season had been 
over a long time and no one met the train. I got down 
from the train with my bag, it was Sim’s bag, and very 
light to carr}% being empty except for two shirts, and 
stood under the roof of the station in the rain while 
the train went on. I found a man in the station and 
asked him if he knew what hotels were open. The Gran 
Hotel des Isles Borromees was open and several small 
hotels that stayed open all the year. I started in the 
rain for the Isles Borromees canning my bag. I saw a 
carriage coming down the street and signalled to the 
driver. It was better to arrive in a carriage. We drove 
up to the carriage entrance of the big hotel and the con- 
cierge came out with an umbrella and was very polite. 

I took a good room. It was very big and light and 
looked out on the lake. The clouds were down over the 
lake but it would be beautiful with the sunlight. I was 
expecting m}" wife, I said. There was a big double-bed, 
a leMo matrimonzale, with a satin coverlet. The hotel 
was very luxurious. I \vent down the long halls, down 
the wide stairs, through the rooms to the bar. I knew the 
barman and sat on a high stool and ate salted almonds 
md potato chips. The martini felt cool and clean. 

‘What are you doing here in borgheseV the barman 
asked after he had mixed a second martini. 

258 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T on leave. Convalesciri^-kave/ 

‘There is no one here. I don’t know wh} they keep 
the raitel optnh 

TIave you been fishinc^r’ 

T've caudit some beautiful pieces. Troiling this 
time of year you catch some beautiful pieces/ 

'Did you ever get the tobacco I sent?^ 

‘Yes. Didn’t you get my card?’ 

I laughed, I had not been able to get the tobacco. 
It was American Yaren that he wanted, but my 

relatives had stopped sending it or it was being held up. 
Anway it never came. 

Til get some somewhere/ I said. ‘Tell me have you 
seen two English girls in the town? They came here 
day before yesterday.’ 

‘They are not at the hotel.’ 

‘They are nurses/ 

T have seen two nurses. Wait a minute, I will find 
out where they are/ 

‘One of them is my wife/ I said. ‘I have come here 
to meet her/ 

‘The other is my wife.’ 

T am not joking/ 

‘Pardon my stupid joke/ he said. T did not under- 
stand/ He went away and was gone quite a little while. 
I ate olives, salted almonds and potato chips and looked 
at myself in civilian clothes in the mirror behind the 
bar. The bartender came back. ‘They are at the little 
hotel near the station/ he said. 

‘How about some sandwiches?’ 

Til ring for some. You understand there is nothing 
here, now there are no people.’ 

‘Isn’t there really anyone at all?’ 

259 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Yes. There are a few people.’ 

The sandwiches came and I ate three and drank a 
couple more martinis. I had never tasted am^thing so 
cool and clean. They made me feel civilized. I had had 
too much red wine, bread, cheese, bad coffee and grappa. 
I sat on the high stool before the pleasant mahogany, 
the brass and the mirrors and did not think at all. The 
barman asked me some question. 

‘Don’t talk about the war,’ I said. The war was a 
long way away. Alaybe there wasn’t any war. There 
was no war here. Then I realized it was over for me. 
But I did not have the feeling that it was really over. 
I had the feeling of a boy who thinks of what is happening 
at a certain hour at the schoolhouse from which he has 
played truant. 

Catherine and Helen Ferguson were at supper when 
I came to their hotel. Standing in the hallway I saw 
them at table. Catherine’s face was away from me and 
I saw the line of her hair and her cheek and her lovely 
neck and shoulders. Ferguson was talking. She stopped 
when I came in. 

‘Mv God,’ she said. 

‘Hello,’ I said. 

‘Why it’s you!’ Catherine said. Her face lighted 
up. She looked too happy to believe it. I kissed her. 
Catherine blushed and I sat down at the table. 

‘You’re a fine mess,’ Ferguson said. ‘What are you 
doing here? Have you eaten?’ 

‘No.’ The girl who was serving the meal came in 
and I told her to bring a plate for me. Catherine looked 
at me all the time, her eyes happy. 

‘What are you doing in mufti?’ Ferguson asked. 

360 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘I'm in the Cabinet.'’ 

‘You’re in some mess.’' 

‘Cheer up, Fergy. Cheer up just a little.’ 

‘Fm not cheered by seeing you. I know the mess 
you’ve gotten this girl into. Y’ou’re no cheerful sight 
to me.’ 

Catherine smiled at me and touched me with her 
foot under the table. 

‘Xo one got me in a mess, Fergy. I get in my own 
messes.’ 

‘I can’t stand him,’ Ferguson said. ‘He’s done nothing 
but ruin you with his sneaking Italian tricks. Americans 
are worse than Italians.’ 

‘The Scotch are such a moral people,’ Catherine said. 

‘I don’t mean that. I mean his Italian sneakiness.’ 

‘Am I sneaky, Fergy:’ 

‘Y'ou are. Y’ou’re worse than sneaky. Y’ou’re like a 
snake. A snake with an Italian uniform: with a cape 
around your neck.’ 

T haven’t got an Italian uniform now.’ 

‘That’s just another example of your sneakiness. 
Y’’ou had a love affair all summer and got this girl with 
child and now I suppose you’ll sneak off.’ 

I smiled at Catherine and she smiled at me. 

‘We’ll both sneak off,’ she said. 

‘Y’ou’re two of the same thing,’ Ferguson said. ‘I’m 
ashamed of you, Catherine Barkley. Y’ou have no shame 
and no honour and you’re as sneaky as he is.’ 

‘Don’t, Fergy,’ Catherine said and patted her hand. 
‘Don’t denounce me. Yun know we like each other.’ 

‘Take your hand away,’ Ferguson said. Her face 
was red. ‘If you had any shame it would be different. 
But you’re God knows how many months gone with 

261 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

child and you think it’s a joke and are all smiles because 
your seducer’s come back. You’ve no shame and no 
feelings.’ She began to cry. Catherine went over and 
put her arm around her. As she stood comforting Fer- 
guson , I could see no change in her figure. 

T don’t care/ Ferguson sobbed. T think it’s dreadful.’ 

'TherCj there, Ferg}^/ Catherine comforted her. T’ll 
be ashamed. Don’t cry, Fergy. Don’t cry, old Fergy.’ 

T’m not crying,’ Ferguson sobbed. ‘I’m not ciy^ing. 
Except for the awful thing you’ve gotten into.’ She 
looked at me. T hate you/ she said. ‘She can’t make 
me not hate you. You dirty sneaking American Italian.’ 
Her eyes and nose were red with crying. 

Catherine smiled at me. 

‘Don’t you smile at him with your arm around me.’ 

‘You’re unreasonable, Fergy.’ 

‘I know it/ Ferguson sobbed. ‘You mustn’t mind 
me, either of you. I’m so upset. I’m not reasonable. I 
know it. I want you both to be happy.’ 

‘We’re happy,’ Catherine said. ‘You’re a sweet Fergy.’ 

Ferguson cried again. ‘I don’t want you happy the 
way you are. Why don’t you get married? You haven’t 
got another wife have you?’ 

‘No,’ I said. Catherine laughed. 

‘It’s nothing to laugh about/ Ferguson said. ‘Plenty 
of them have other wives.’ 

‘We’ll be married, Fergy,’ Catherine said, ‘if it will 
please you.’ 

‘Not to please me. You should want to be married.’ 

‘We’ve been very busy.’ 

‘Yes. I know. Busy making babies.’ I thought she 
was going to cry again but she went into bitterness 
instead. ‘I suppose you’ll go off with him now to-night?’ 

262 



A FAREWELL TO AR^IS 


^Yes/ said Catherine. Tf he wants med 

AVhat about me?' 

h^re you afraid to stay here alone?' 

^YeSj I amd 

'Then Fll stay with you.’ 

‘X 05 go on with him. Go with him right away. I’m 
sick of seeing both of you.’ 

'We’d better finish dinner/ 

'Xo. Go right away.’ 

'Ferg}% be reasonable.’ 

T say get out right away. Go away both of you.’ 

‘Let's go then,’ I said. I was sick of Feigy. 

'You do want to go. You see you want to leave me 
even to eat dinner alone. I’ve always wanted to go to 
the Italian lakes and this is how it is. Oh, Oh,’ she 
sobbed, then looked at Catherine and choked. 

''Well stay till after dinner/ Catherine said. 'And 
111 not leave you alone if you want me to stay. I won’t 
leave you alone, Fergjv’ 

'Xo. Xo, I want you to go. I want you to go.’ She 
wiped her eyes. T’m so unreasonable. Please don’t mind 
me.’ 

The girl who sensed the meal had been upset by all 
the ciying. Xow as she brought in the next course she 
seemed relieved that things were better. 

That night at the hotel, in our room with the long 
empty hall outside and our shoes outside the door, a 
thick carpet on the floor of the room, outside the win- 
dows the rain failing and in the room light and pleasant 
and cheerful, then the light out and it exciting with 
smooth sheets and the bed comfortable, feeling that we 
had come home, feeling no longer alone, waking in the 

263 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

night to find the other one there, and not gone away; 
all other things were unreal. We slept when we were 
tired and if we woke the other one woke too so one 
was not alone. Often a man wishes to be alone and a 
girl wishes to be alone too and if they love each other 
they are jealous of that in each other, but I can truly 
say we never felt that. We could feel alone when we 
were together, alone against the others. It has only 
happened to me like that once. I have been alone while 
I was with many girls and that is the way that you can 
be most lonely. But W'e were never lonely and never 
afraid when we were together. I know that the night 
is not the same as the day: that all things are different, 
that the things of the night cannot be explained in the 
day, because they do not then exist, and the night can 
be a dreadful time for lonely people once their loneliness 
has started. But with Catherine there w^as almost no 
difference in the night except that it was an even better 
time. If people bring so much courage to this world 
the world has to kill them to break them, so of course 
it kills them. The world breaks every one and after- 
ward many are strong at the broken places. But those 
that will not break it kills. It kills the very good and the 
very gentle and the very brave impartially. If you are 
none of these you can be sure it will kill you too but there 
will be no special hurry. 

I remember waking in the morning. Catherine was 
asleep and the sunlight was coming in through the win- 
dow. The rain had stopped and I stepped out of bed 
and across the floor to the window. Down below were 
the gardens, bare now but beautifully regular, the gravel 
paths, the trees, the stone w’all by the lake and the lake 

264 



A FAREWELL TO ARIMS 

in the sunlight with the mountains beyond, I stood 
at the window looking out and when I turned away I 
saw Catherine was awake and watching me. 

‘How are you^ darling?’ she said. ‘Isn’t it a lovely 
day? ^ 

‘How do you feel?’ 

T feel ver}' well. We had a lovely nightd 

‘Do you want breakfast?’ 

She wanted breakfast. So did I and we had it in 
bed, the November sunlight coming in the window, and 
the breakfast tray across my lap. 

‘Don’t you want the paper? You always wanted the 
paper in the hospital.’ 

‘No,’ I said, ‘I don’t want the paper now.’ 

‘Was it so bad you don’t want even to read about it?’ 

T don’t want to read about it.’ 

T wish I had been with you so I would know about 
it too.’ 

T’ll tell you about it if I ever get it straight in my 
head.’ 

‘But won’t they arrest you if they catch you out of 
uniform?’ 

‘They’ll probably shoot me.’ 

‘Then well not stay here. We’ll get out of the country.^ 

T’d thought of that.’ 

‘Well get out. Darling, you shouldn’t take silly 
chances. Tell me how did you come from Alestre to 
Milan?’ 

T came on the train. I was in uniform then.’ 

‘Weren’t you in danger then?’ 

‘Not much. I had an old order of movement. I fixed 
the dates on it in Mestre.’ 

‘Darling, you’re liable to be arrested here any time. 

265 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I won’t have it. It’s silly to do something like that. 
Where would we be if they took you off?’ 

‘Let’s not think about it. I’m tired of thinking about 
it.’ 

‘What would you do if they came to arrest your’ 

‘Shoot them.’ 

‘You see how silly you are, I won’t let you go out of 
the hotel until we leave here.’ 

‘Where are we going to go?’ 

‘Please don’t be that way, darling. We’ll go where- 
ever you say. But please find some place to go right 
away.’ 

‘Switzerland is down the lake, we can go there.’ 

‘That will be lovely.’ 

It was clouding over outside and the lake was dark- 
ening. 

‘I wish we did not always have to live like criminals,’ 
I said. 

‘Darling, don’t be that way. You haven’t lived like 
a criminal very long. And we’ll never live like criminals. 
We’re going to have a fine time.’ 

‘I feel like a criminal. I’ve deserted from the army.’ 

‘Darling, please be sensible. It’s not deserting from 
the army. It’s only the Italian army.’ 

I laughed. ‘You’re a fine girl. Let’s get back into 
bed. I feel fine in bed.’ 

A little while later Catherine said, ‘You don’t feel 
like a criminal do you?’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘Not when I’m wdth you.’ 

‘You’re such a silly boy,’ she said. ‘But I’ll look 
after you. Isn’t it splendid, darling, that I don’t have 
any morning-sickness?’ 


266 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Tt's grand.' 

'You don't appreciate what a fine wife you have. 
But I don't care. Fll get you some place where they 
canh arrest you and then w’e'll have a lovely time.' 

'Let's go there right away/ 

'We will, darling. Fll go any place any time you 

wish/ 

'Let's not think about an\i;hing/ 

'All right/ 


CHAPTER 35 

Catherine went along the lake to the little hotel to 
see Ferguson and I sat in the bar and read the papers. 
There were comfortable leather chairs in the bar and I 
sat in one of them and read until the barman came in. 
The army had not stood at the Tagliamento. They 
were falling back to the Piave. I remembered the 
Piave. The railroad crossed it near San Dona going 
up to the front. It was deep and slow there and quite 
narrow. Down below there were mosquito marshes 
and canals. There were some lovely villas. Once, before 
the war, going up to Cortina D'Ampezzo I had gone 
along it for several hours in the Mils. Up there it 
looked like a trout stream, flowing swiftly with shallow 
stretches and pools under the shadow of the rocks. 
The road turned off from it at Cadore. I wondered 
how the army that was up there would come down. 
The barman came in. 

'Count Greffi was asking for you,' he said. 

'Who?' 


267 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Count Greffi. You remember the o!d man who was 
here when you were here before/ 

‘Is he here?’ 

‘YeSs he’s here with his niece. I told himjyou were 
here. He wants you to play billiards.’ 

‘Where is he?’ 

‘He’s taking a w'alk.’ 

‘How is he?’ 

‘He’s younger than ever. He drank three champagne 
cocktails last night before dinner.’ 

‘How’s his billiard game?’ 

‘Good. He beat me. When I told him you were 
here he was very pleased. There’s nobody here for him 
to play with/ 

Count GrefS was ninety-four years old. He had 
been a contemporary of Mettemich, and w-as an old 
man with w'hite hair and moustache and beautiful man- 
ners. He had been in the diplomatic service of both 
Austria and Italy and his birthday parties were the 
great social event of Tvlilan, He was living to be one 
hundred years old and played a smoothly fluent game 
of billiards that contrasted with his own ninety-four- 
y ear-old brittleness. I had met him when I had been 
at Stresa once before out of season and while we played 
billiards w^e drank champagne. I thought it was a splendid 
custom and he gave me fifteen points in a hundred and 
beat me. 

‘W^hy didn’t you tell me he was here?’ 

T forgot it/ 

‘Who else is here?’ 

‘No one you know. There are only six people alto- 
gether/ 

‘What are you doing now?’ 

268 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Xothing/ 

^Come on out fishing/ 

T could crme for an hour.’ 

'Come on. Bring the trolline line/ 

The harman put on a coat and we went out* We 
went down and got a boat and I rowed while the bar- 
man sat in the stem and let out the line with a spinner 
and a hea\w sinker on the end to troll for lake trout. 
We rowed along the shore, the barman holding the line 
in his hand and giving it occasional jerks forward. 
Stresa looked very deserted from the lake. There were 
the long rows of bare trees, the big hotels and the closed 
villas. I rowed across to Isola Bella and went close 
to the walls, where the water deepened sharply, and 
you saw the rock wall slanting down in the clear water, 
and then up and along to the fisherman s island. The 
sun was under a cloud and the water was dark and 
smooth and very cold. We did not have a strike though 
we saw some circles on the water from rising fish. 

I rowed up opposite the fisherman’s island where 
there were boats drawn up and men were mending nets. 

^Should we get a drink?’ 

hAlI right.’ 

I brought the boat up to the stone pier and the bar- 
man pulled in the line, coiling it on the bottom of the 
boat and hooking the spinner on the edge of the gun- 
wale. I stepped out and tied the boat. We went into a 
little cafe, sat at a bare w’ooden table and ordered ver- 
mouth. 

‘Are YOU tired from rowine?’ 

‘Xo/” 

Til row back/ he said. 

T like to row/ 


269 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Alaybe if you- hold the line it will change the luck.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Tell me how goes the war.’ 

‘Rotten.’ 

‘I don’t have to go. I’m too old, like Count GrefE.’ 

‘IMaybe you’ll have to go yet.’ 

‘Next year they’ll call my class. But I won’t go.’ 

‘What will you do?’ 

‘Get out of the country. I wouldn’t go to war. I 
was at the war once in Abyssinia. Nix. Why do vou 
go?’ 

‘I don’t know. I was a fool.’ 

‘Have another vermouth?’ 

‘All right.’ 

The barman rowed back. We trolled up the lake be- 
yond Stresa and then down not far from shore. I held 
the taut line and felt the faint pulsing of the spinner 
revolving while I looked at the dark November water 
of the lake and the deserted shore. The barman rowed 
with long strokes and on the forward thrust of the boat 
the line throbbed. Once I had a strike: the line hardened 
suddenly and jerked back, I pulled and felt the live 
weight of the trout and then the line throbbed again. I 
had missed him. 

‘Did he feel big?’ 

‘Pretty big.’ 

‘Once when I w^as out trolling alone I had the line 
in my teeth and one struck and nearly took my mouth 
out.’ 

‘The best way is to have it over your leg,’ I said. 
‘Then you feel it and don’t lose your teeth.’ 

I put my hand in the water. It w^as very cold. We 
were almost opposite the hotel nowx 

270 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T have to go in,’ the barman said, 'to be there for 
eleven o’clock. Vlmire du cocktaiL^ 

hAll right/ 

I pulled in the line and wrapped it on a stick notched 
at each end. The barman put the boat in a little slip in 
the stone wall and locked it with a chain and padlock. 

'Any time vou want it/ he said, Til give you the key/ 

^Thanks.’ ' 

We went up to the hotel and into the bar. I did not 
want another drink so early in the morning so I went 
up to our room. The maid had just finished doing the 
room and Catherine was not back yet. I lay down on 
the bed and tried to keep from thinking. 

"When Catherine came back it was all right again. 
Ferguson was downstairs, she said. She was coming 
to lunch. 

T knew you wouldn’t mind/ Catherine said. 

^Xo,’ I said, 

'What’s the matter, darling?’ 

T don’t know.’ 

T know. You haven’t anything to do. All you have 
is me andl go away.’ 

'That’s true,’ 

T’m sorry, darling. I know it must be a dreadful 
feeling to have nothing at all suddenly.’ 

‘Aly life used to be full of eveiything/ I said. 'Now 
if you aren’t with me I haven’t a thing in the world.’ 

'But 111 be with you. I was only gone for two hours. 
Isn’t there anWhing you can do?’ 

T went fishing with the barman.’ 

'Wasn’t it fun?’ 

'Yes.’ 

'Don’t think about me when I’m not here,’ 

271 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘That’s the way I worked it at the front. But there 
was something to do then.’ 

‘Othello with his occupation gone,’ she teased. 

‘Othello was a nigger,’ I said. ‘Besides, I’m not 
jealous. I’m just so in love with you that there isn’t 
amthing else.’ 

‘Will you be a good boy and be nice to Ferguson?’ 

‘I’m always nice to Ferguson unless she curses me.’ 

‘Be nice to her. Think how much we have and she 
hasn’t anything.’ 

‘I don’t think she w’ants what we have.’ 

‘You don’t know much, darling, for such a wise boy.’ 

‘I’ll be nice to her.’ 

‘I know you will. You’re so sweet.’ 

‘She won’t stay afterward, will she?’ 

‘No. I’ll get rid of her.’ 

‘And then we’ll come up here.’ 

‘Of course. What do you think I want to do?’ 

We went downstairs to have lunch with Ferguson. 
She was very impressed by the hotel and the splendour 
of the dining-room. W^e had a good lunch with a 
couple of bottles of white capri. Count Greffi came 
into the dining-room and bowed to us. His niece, w'ho 
looked a little like my grandmother, was with him. I 
told Catherine and Ferguson about him and Ferguson 
was very impressed. The hotel was ver}" big and grand 
and empty but the food wns good, the wine was very 
pleasant and finally the wine made us all feel very well. 
Catherine had no need to feel any better. She wns 
very happy. Ferguson became quite cheerful. I felt 
very w’^ell myself. After lunch Ferguson went back to 
her hotel. She wns going to lie down for a W’hile after 
lunch she said. 

272 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 
l?^tc in the rJternoon sr.meone knocked on our 

door, 

AYho is it?' 

®The Count Greffi wishes to know if you will play 
billiards with him/ 

I looked at my watch; I had taken it off and it was 
under the pillow. 

'Do you have to go, darling?’ Catherine whispered. 

T think Fd better.’ The watch said a quarter past 
four o'clock. Out loud I said, ‘Tell the Count Greffi 
I will be in the billiard-room at five o’clock.’ 

At a quarter to five I kissed Catherine good-bye and 
went into the bathroom to dress. Knotting my tie and 
looking in the glass I looked strange to myself in the 
civilian clothes. I must remember to buy some more 
shirts and socks. 

‘Will you be away a long time?' Catherine asked. She 
looked lovely in the bed. ‘Would you hand me the brush?' 

I watched her brushing her hair, holding her head so 
the weight of her hair all came on one side. It was 
dark outside and the light over the head of the bed 
shone on her hair and on her neck and shoulders. I 
went over and kissed her and held her hand with the 
brush and her head sunk back on the pillow. I kissed her 
neck and shoulders. I felt faint with loving her so much. 

T don't want to go away.' 

T don’t want you to go away.' 

T won’t go then.' 

‘Yes. Go. It’s only for a little while and then, you'll 
come back.' 

‘Well have dinner up here.' 

‘Hurr}” and come back.' 

I found the Count Greffi in the billiard-room. He 

s 273 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

was practising strokes, looking very fragile under the 
light that came down above the billiard table. On a card 
table a little way beyond the light was a silver icing- 
bucket with the necks and corks of two champagne 
bottles showing above the ice. The Count GrefE 
straightened up when I came tow’ard the table and 
walked toward me. He put out his hand, Tt is such a 
great pleasure that you are here. You were very kind 
to come to play with me,^ 

Tt was very nice of you to ask me.’ 

“^Are you quite well? They told me you were wounded 
on the Isonzo. I hope you are well again.’ 

T’m very well. Have you been well?’ 

‘Oh, I am always well. But I am getting old. I detect 
signs of age now.’ 

T can’t believe it.’ 

‘Yes. Do you want to know one? It is easier for 
me to talk Italian. I discipline myself but I find when 
I am tired that it is so much easier to talk Italian. So 
I know I must be getting old.’ 

‘We could talk Italian. I am a little tired too.’ 

‘Oh, but when you are tired it will be easier for you 
to talk English.’ 

‘American.’ 

‘Yes. American. You will please talk American. It 
is a delightful language.’ 

‘I hardly ever see Americans.’ 

‘You must miss them. One misses one’s country- 
men and especially one’s countrywomen. I know that 
experience. Should we play or are you too tired?’ 

‘I’m not really tired. I said that for a joke. What 
handicap will you give me?’ 

‘Have you been playing very much?’ 

274 



A FAREWELL TO ARM^. 


A'/i pL} V cIL Tun k: ii L,:ncrcii:' 

iLltur me/ 

Tifmen?’ 

'ITrn \ir:Al hv Fnu but you vAIl beat me/ 

'biaoi/i me p]ey for a sta!ier You always wished to 
play f }r a stake/ 

T think \ee“d better/ 

k\I! nad:t. I mill mbe }oi: eighteen p^oints and we 
wil! play f m a franc a point/ 

He played a lovely 2amc of billiards and with the 
! :.fk ; I was only four ahead at fifty. Count Grcffi 
pushed a button on due wall t?; ring for the barniiin. 

"Open one bottle, please/ he said. Then to me, AVe 
will take a little stimulant/ The wine was icy cold and 
very dry and noed. 

‘Should we talk Italian? Would you mind very- much? 
It is my great weakness now/ 

We Avent on playing, sipping the wine between shots, 
speaking in Italian, but talking little, concentrated on 
the game. Count Greffi made his one-hundredth point 
and with the handicap I was only at ninety-four. He 
smiled and patted me on the shoulder. 

*Xo\v \xe will drink the other bottle and you will tell 
me about the war/ He waited for me to sit down. 

LAbout ar.mhir.r else/ I said. 

'You don't want to talk about it? Good. What have 
you been reading?’ 

'Nothing,’ I said. T’m afraid I am very’' dull.’ 

'No. But you should read.’ 

'What is there written in war-time?’ 

'There is Le Feu by a Frenchman, Barbusse. There 
is d/r. Britling Sees Through It.^ 

275 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'No, he doesn't/ 

%Vhat?' 

'He doesn't see through it. Those books were at the 
hospital/ 

'Then you have been reading?' 

'YeSj but nothing any good.’ 

T thought Mr, Britling a verj" good study of the English 
middle-class soul.’ 

T don’t know about the soul.’ 

Toot boy. We none of us know’ about the soul. Are 
you CroyantV 

'At night.’ Count Greffi smiled and turned the glass 
with his fingers. 

T had expected to become more devout as I grow older 
but somehow I haven’t,’ he said. 'It is a great pity.’ 

'Would you like to live after death?’ I asked and 
instantly felt a fool to mention death. But he did not 
mind the word. 

'It would depend on the life. Thislifeis very pleasant. I 
would like to live forever/ he smiled. ‘I very nearly have.’ 

We w^ere sitting in the deep leather chairs, the cham- 
pagne in the ice-buckci and our glasses on the table 
between us. 

'If you ever live to be as old as I am you will find 
many things strange.’ 

'You never seem old.’ 

'It is the body that is old. Sometimes I am afraid 
I will break off a finger as one breaks a stick of chalk. 
And the spirit is no older and not much wiser.’ 

'You are wise.’ 

'No, that is the great fallacy, the wisdom of old men. 
They do not grow wise. They grow careful.’ 

'Perhaps that is wisdom.’ 

376 



A FAREWELL TO AR.MS 


‘It i.i a \i.Ty unattri-ctivt; wiadoi^'.. What tl>'j y-'iu 
nv,st:’' 

‘Sorat-Tjr.e I hive.’ 

‘With* it is ti.c same. That is not wisdom. Do you 

\ iitcr 
•Yrs.’ 

‘5o do I. Because it IS I have. .\nd to "ive birthday 
parties,’ he laughed. *Y<-»u arc • wiser than I am. 

You do not cive birthday parties.’ 
both drank the wine. 

‘What do you think of the war really?’ I asked. 

‘I think it is stupid.’ 

‘Who will win it:’ 

‘Italy.’ 

‘Why?’ 

‘They are a younger nation.’ 

‘Do younger nations always win wars?' 

‘They are apt to for a time.’ 

‘Then what happens?’ 

‘They become older nations.’ 

‘Y'ou said you were not wise.’ 

‘Dear boy, that is not wisdom. That is cynicism.’ 

‘It sounds very wise to me.’ 

‘It’s not particularly. I could quote you the examples 
on the other side. But it is not bad. Have we finished 
the champagne?’ 

‘Almost.’ 

‘Should we drink some more? Then I must dress,’ 
‘Perhaps we’d better not now.' 

‘Y’ou are sure you don’t want more?’ 

‘YTs.’ He stood up. 

‘I hope you will be very fortunate and very happy 
and very, ver\' healthy.’ 


277 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Thank you. And I hope you will live forever.’ 

‘Thank you. I have. And if you ever become devout 
pray for me if I am dead. I am asking several of my 
friends to do that. I had expected to become devout 
myself but it has not come.’ I thought he smiled sadly 
but I could not tell. He was so old and his face was very 
wrinkled, so that a smile used so many lines that all 
gradations were lost. 

T might become very devout,’ I said. ‘Anyway, I 
will pray for you.’ 

T had always expected to become devout. All my 
family died very devout. But somehow it does not 
come.’ 

Tt’s too early.’ 

‘Maybe it is too late. Perhaps I have outlived my 
religious feeling.’ 

‘My own comes only at night.’ 

‘Then too you are in love. Do not forget that is a 
religious feeling.’ 

‘You believe so?’ 

‘Of course.’ He took a step toward the table. ‘You 
were very kind to play,’ 

‘It was a great pleasure.’ 

‘We will walk upstairs together.’ 


CHAPTER 36 


That night there was a storm and I woke to hear the 
rain lashing the window-panes. It was coming in the 
open window. Someone had knocked on the door. I 

278 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

went to the door very softly, not to disturb Catherine, 
and opened it. The barman stood there. He wore his 
overcoat and carried his wet hat. 

‘Can I speak to j'^ou, Tenente?’ 

‘What’s the matter?’ 

‘It’s a very serious matter.’ 

I looked around. The room was dark. I saw the 
water on the floor from the w'indow. ‘Come in,’ I said. 
I took him by the arm into the bathroom; locked the 
door and put on the light. I sat down on the edge of the 
bathtub. 

‘What’s the matter, Emilio? Are you in trouble?’ 

‘No. You are, Tenente.’ 

‘Yes?’ 

‘They are going to arrest you in the morning.’ 

‘Yes?’ 

‘I came to tell you. I was out in the town and I heard 
them talking in a cafe.’ 

‘I see.’ 

He stood there, his coat wet, holding his wet hat and 
said nothing. 

‘Why are they going to arrest me?’ 

‘For something about the war.’ 

‘Do you know what?’ 

‘No. But I know' that they know’ you were here before 
as an officer and now you are here out of uniform. After 
this retreat they arrest everybody.’ 

I thought a minute. 

‘W’hat time do they come to arrest me?’ 

‘In the morning. I don’t know' the time.’ 

‘What do you say to do?’ 

He put his hat in the washbowl. It was very wet and 
had been dripping on the floor. 

279 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Tf you have nothing to fear an arrest is nothing. But 
it is always bad to be arrested, especially now/ 

T don’t want to be arrested/ 

‘Then go to Switzerland/ 

‘How?’ 

Tn my boat/ 

‘There is a storm,’ I said. 

‘The storm is over. It is rough but you will be all 
right.’ 

‘When should we go?’ 

‘Right away. They might come to arrest you early 
in the morning.’ 

‘What about our bags?’ 

‘Get them packed. Get your lady dressed. I will take 
care of them.’ 

‘Where will you be?’ 

‘I will w'ait here. I don’t want anyone to see me outside 
in the hall.’ 

I opened the door, closed it, and went into the bedroom. 
Catherine was awake. 

‘What is it, darling?’ 

‘It’s all right, Cat,’ I said. ‘Would you like to get 
dressed right away and go in a boat to Switzerland?’ 

‘Would you?’ 

‘No,’ I said, ‘I’d like to go back to bed.’ 

‘What is it about?’ 

‘The barman says they are going to arrest me in the 
morning.’ 

‘Is the barman crazy?’ 

‘No/ 

‘Then please hurry, darling, and get dressed so we 
can start/ She sat up on the side of the bed. She was 
still sleepy. ‘Is that the barman in the bathroom?’ 

280 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Wes.’ 

When I won’t wash. Please look the other way, darling, 
and rii be dressed in just a minute.’ 

I saw her white back as she took off her nightgown 
and then I looked away because she wanted me to. She 
was beginning to be a little big with the child and she 
did not want me to see her. I dressed hearing the rain 
on the windows. I did not have much to put in my bag. 

Where’s plenty of room in my bag, Cat, if you need any.’ 

T’m almost packed,’ she said. ‘Darling, Fm awfully 
stupid, but why is the barman in the bathroom?’ 

‘Sh ~ he’s waiting to take our bags down.’ 

‘He’s aw' fully nice.’ 

‘He’s an old friend,’ I said. ‘I nearly sent him some 
pipe-tobacco once.’ 

I looked out the open wdndow at the dark night. I 
could not see the lake, only the dark and the rain but 
the wind was quieter. 

‘I’m ready, darling,’ Catherine said. 

‘All right.’ I went to the bathroom door. ‘Here are the 
bags, Emilio,’ I said. The barman took the two bags, 

‘You’re very good to help us,’ Catherine said. 

‘That’s nothing, lady,’ the barman said. ‘I’m glad 
to help you just so I don’t get in trouble myself. Listen,’ 
he said to me, ‘I’ll take these out the ser\^ants’ stairs 
and to the boat. You just go out as though you were 
going for a walk.’ 

‘It’s a lovely night for a walk,’ Catherine said. 

‘It’s a bad night all right.’ 

T’m glad I’ve an umbrella,’ Catherine said. 

We walked dowm the hall and dowm the wide thickly 
carpeted stairs. At the foot of the stairs by the door 
the porter sat behind his desk. 

281 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

He looked surprised at seeing us. 

‘You’re not going out, sir?’ he said. 

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘We’re going to see the storm along the 
lake.’ 

‘Haven’t you got an umbrella, sir?’ 

‘No,’ I said. ‘This coat sheds water.’ 

He looked at it doubtfully. ‘I’ll get you an umbrella, 
sir,’ he said. He went away and came back with a big 
umbrella. ‘It is a little big, sir,’ he said. I gave him 
a ten-lira note. ‘Oh you are too good, sir. Thank you 
very much,’ he said. He held the door open and we 
went out into the rain. He smiled at Catherine and she 
smiled at him. ‘Don’t stay out in the storm,’ he said. 
‘You will get wet, sir and lady.’ He was only the second 
porter, and his English was still literally translated. 

‘We’ll be back,’ I said. We walked down the path 
under the giant umbrella and out through the dark wet 
gardens to the road and across the road to the trellised 
pathway along the lake. The wind was blowing off- 
shore now. It was a cold, wet November wind and I 
knew it was snowing in the mountains. We came along 
past the chained boats in the slips along the quay to 
where the barman’s boat should be. The water was 
dark against the stone. The barman stepped out from 
beside the row of trees. 

‘The bags are in the boat,’ he said. 

‘I want to pay you for the boat,’ I said. 

‘How much money have you?’ 

‘Not so much.’ 

‘You send me the money later. That will be all right.’ 

‘How much?’ 

‘What you want.’ 

‘Tell me how much.’ 


382 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Tf you get through send me five hundred francs. 
You won’t mind that if you get through.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Here are sandwiches.’ He handed me a package. 
‘Everything there was in the bar. It’s all here. This 
is a bottle of brandy and a bottle of wine.’ I put them 
in my bag. ‘Let me pay you for those.’ 

‘All right, give me fifty lire.’ 

I gave it to him. ‘The brandy is good,’ he said. 
‘You don’t need to be afraid to give it to your lady. 
She better get in the boat.’ He held the boat, it rising 
and falling against the stone wall and I helped Catherine 
in. She sat in the stem and pulled her cape around 
her. 

‘You know where to go?’ 

‘Up the lake.’ 

‘You know how far?’ 

‘Past Luino.’ 

‘Past Luino, Caimero, Cannobio, Tranzano. You 
aren’t in Switzerland until you come to Brissago. You 
have to pass Monte Tamara.’ 

‘What time is it?’ Catherine asked. 

‘It’s only eleven o’clock,’ I said. 

‘If you row all the time you ought to be there by 
seven o’clock in the morning.’ 

‘Is it that far?’ 

‘It’s thirty-five kilometres.’ 

‘How should we go? In this rain we need a compass.’ 

‘No. Row to Isola Bella. Then on the other side of 
Isola Madre go with the wind. The wind will take you to 
Pallanza. You will see the lights. Then go up the shore.’ 

‘Maybe the wind will change.’ 

‘No,’ he said. ‘This wind will blow like this for three 

283 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


days. It comes straight down from the Mattarone. 
There is a can to bail with.’ 

‘Let me pay you something for the boat now.’ 

‘No, I’d rather take a chance. If you get through you 
pay me all you can.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘I don’t think you’ll get drowned.’ 

‘That’s good.’ 

‘Go with the wind up the lake.’ 

‘All right.’ I stepped in the boat. 

‘Did you leave the money for the hotel?’ 

‘Yes. In an envelope in the room.’ 

‘All right. Good luck, Tenente.’ 

‘Good luck. We thank you many times.’ 

‘You won’t thank me if you get drowned.’ 

‘What does he say?’ Catherine asked. 

‘He saj^s good luck.’ 

‘Good luck,’ Catherine said. ‘Thank you very much.’ 

‘Are you ready?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

He bent down and shoved us oif. I dug at the water 
with the oars, then waved one hand. The barman waved 
back deprecatingly. I saw the lights of the hotel and 
rowed out, rowing straight out until they w-ere out of 
sight. There was quite a sea running but we were going 
with the wind. 


CHAPTER 37 

I ROWED in the dark keeping the vrind in my face. The 
rain had stopped and only came occasionally in gusts. 
It was very dark, and the wind was cold. I could see 

284 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Catherine in the stern but I could not see the water 
where the blades of the oars dipped. The oars were 
long and there were no leathers to keep them from 
slipping out. I pulled, raised, leaned forward, found 
the water, dipped and pulled, rowing as easily as I 
could. I did not feather the oars because the wind was 
with us. I knew my hands wnuld blister and I w^anted 
to delay it as long as I could. The boat w^as light and 
row^ed easily. I pulled it along in the dark water. I could 
not see, and hoped w^e wmuld soon come opposite 
Pallanza. 

We never saw Pallanza. The wind was blowing up 
the lake and w’e passed the point that hides Pallanza in 
the dark and never saw the lights. When we finally 
saw some lights much further up the lake and close to 
the shore it w^as Intra. But for a long time we did not 
see any lights, nor did w'e see the shore but rowed steadily 
in the dark riding with the weaves. Sometimes I missed 
the water with the oars in the dark as a w^ave lifted the 
boat. It was quite rough; but I kept on rowing, until 
suddenly we w-ere close ashore against a point of rock 
that rose beside us; the waves striking against it, rushing 
high up, then falling back. I pulled hard on the right 
oar and backed W’ater with the other and w^e w'ent out 
into the lake again; the point w^as out of sight and we 
wxre going on up the lake. 

‘WeVe across the lake,’ I said to Catherine. 

%Veren’t w^e going to see Pallanza?’ 

‘WeVe missed it.’ 

'How are you, darling?’ 

T’m fine.’ 

T could take the oars awhile.’ 

'No, I’m fine.’ 


285 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Toor Ferguson/ Catherine said. Tn the morning 
shell come to the hotel and find we’re gone.’ 

T’m not worrjlng so much about that/ I said, ‘as 
about getting into the Swiss part of the lake before it’s 
daylight and the custom guards see us.’ 

Ts it a long way,^’ 

‘It’s thirty some kilometres from here.’ 

I rowed all night. Finally my hands were so sore I 
could hardly close them over the oars. We were nearly 
smashed up on the shore several times. I kept fairly 
close to the shore because I was afraid of getting lost 
on the lake and losing time. Sometimes we were so 
close we could see a row of trees and the road along 
the shore with the mountains behind. The rain stopped 
and the wind drove the clouds so that the moon shone 
through and looking back I could see the long dark 
point of Castagnola and the lake with white-caps and 
beyond, the moon on the high snow mountains. Then 
the clouds came over the moon again and the moun- 
tains and the lake were gone, but it was much lighter 
than it had been before and we could see the shore. I 
could see it too clearly and pulled out where they would 
not see the boat if there were custom guards along the 
Pailanza road. When the moon came out again we 
could see white villas on the shore on the slopes of the 
mountain and the white road where it showed through 
the trees. All the time I was rowing. 

The lake widened and across it on the shore at the 
foot of the mountains on the other side we saw a few 
lights that should be Luino, I saw a wedgelike gap be- 
tween the mountains on the other shore and I thought 
that must be Luino. If it was we were making good 

286 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

time. I pulled in the oars and lay ’back on the seat. I 
was very, very tired of rowing. ^IMy arms and shoulders 
and back ached and my hands were sore. 

T could hold the umbrella/ Catherine said. 'We 
could sail with that with the wind/ 

'Can you steer?’ 

T think so.’ 

'You take this oar and hold it under your arm close 
to the side of the boat and steer and 111 hold the um- 
brella.’ I went back to the stern and showed her how 
to hold the oar. I took the big umbrella the porter had 
given me and sat facing the bow and opened it. It 
opened with a clap. I held it on both sides, sitting 
astride the handle hooked over the seat. The wind was 
full in it and I felt the boat suck forward while I held 
as hard as I could to the two edges. It pulled hard. 
The boat was moving fast. 

'We’re going beautifully/ Catherine said. All I 
could see was umbrella ribs. The umbrella strained and 
pulled and I felt us driving along with it. I braced my 
feet and held back on it, then suddenly, it buckled; I 
felt a rib snap on my forehead, I tried to grab the top 
that was bending with the wind and the whole thing 
buckled and went inside out and I was astride the 
handle of an inside-out, ripped umbrella, where I had 
been holding a wind-filled pulling sail. I unhooked the 
handle from the seat, laid the umbrella in the bow and 
went back to Catherine for the oar. She was laughing. 
She took my hand and kept on laughing. 

'What’s the matter?’ I took the oar. 

'You looked so funny holding that thing/ 

T suppose so,’ 

'Don’t be cross, darling. It w^as awfully funny. You 

287 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

looked about twenty feet broad and very affectionate 
holding the umbrella by the edges ’ she choked. 

Til row/ 

‘Take a rest and a drinlv. It’s a grand night and weVe 
come a long way/ 

T have to keep the boat out of the trough of the 
waves/ 

Tii get you a drink. Then rest a little while, darling.’ 

I held the oars up and we sailed with them. Catherine 
was opening the bag. She handed me the brandy bottle. 
I pulled the cork with my pocket-knife and took a long 
drink. It was smooth and hot and the heat w^ent all 
through me and I felt warmed and cheerful. Tt’s lovely 
brandy,’ I said. The moon was under again but I could 
see the shore. There seemed to be another point going 
out a long way ahead into the lake. 

‘Are you warm enough, Cat?’ 

T’m splendid. Fm a little stiff.’ 

‘Bail out that water and you can put your feet dowm.’ 

Then I rowed and listened to the rowlocks and the 
dip and scrape of the bailing tin under the stern seat. 

‘Would you give me the bailer?’ I said. ‘I want a drink.’ 

‘It’s awfully dirty.’ 

‘That’s all right. I’ll rinse it.’ 

I heard Catherine rinsing it over the side. Then she 
handed it to me dipped full of w^ater. I was thirsty 
after the brandy and the water was icy cold, so cold it 
made my teeth ache. I looked toward the shore. We 
were closer to the long point. There w^'ere lights in the 
bay ahead. 

‘Thanks/ I said and handed back the tin pail. 

‘You’re ever so welcome,’ Catherine said. ‘There’s 
much more if you want it.’ 

288 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Don’t you want to eat something?’ 

‘Xo. I’ll be hungry in a little while. We’ll save it 
till then.’ 

‘All right.’ 

W hat looked like a point ahead was a long high headland. 
I went further out in the lake to pass it. The lake was 
much narrower now. The moon was out again and the 
guardia di finanza could have seen our boat black on the 
water if they had been watching. 

‘How are you, Cat?’ I asked. 

‘I’m all right. Where are we?’ 

‘I don’t think we have more than about eight miles 
more.’ 

‘That’s a long way to row, you poor sweet. Aren’t you 
dead?’ 

‘No. I’m all right. My hands are sore, that’s all.’ 

We went on up the lake. There was a break in the 
mountains on the right bank, a flattening-out with a 
low shore line that I thought must be Cannobio. I 
stayed a long way out because it was from now on that 
we ran the most danger of meeting guardia. There was 
a high dome-capped mountain on the other shore away 
ahead. I was tired. It was no great distance to row 
but when you were out of condition it had been a long 
way. I knew I had to pass that mountain and go up 
the lake at least five miles further before we would be 
in Swiss water. The moon was almost down now but 
before it went down the sky clouded over again and it 
was very dark. I stayed well out in the lake, rowing 
awhile, then resting and holding the oars so that the 
wind struck the blades. 

‘Let me row awhile,’ Catherine said. 

‘I don’t think you ought to.’ 

T 289 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Xonsense. It would be good for me. It would keep 
me from being too stiff.’ 

T don’t think you should. Cat.’ 

‘Nonsense. Rowing in moderation is very good for 
the pregnant lady.’ 

‘All right, you row a little moderately. I’ll go back, 
then you come up. Hold on to both gunwales when you 
come up.’ 

I sat in the stern with my coat on and the collar 
turned up and watched Catherine row. She rowed very 
well but the oars wure too long and bothered her. I 
opened the bag and ate a couple of sandwiches and took 
a drink of the brandy. It made everything much better, 
and I took another drink. 

‘Tell me when you’re tired,’ I said. Then a little 
later, ‘Watch out the oar doesn’t pop you in the tummy.’ 

‘If it did’ - Catherine said between strokes - ‘life might 
be much simpler.’ 

I took another drink of the brandy. 

‘Ho%v are you going?’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Tell me when you want to stop.’ 

‘All right.’ 

I took another drink of the brandy, then took hold 
of the two gunwales of the boat and moved forward. 

‘No. I’m going beautifully.’ 

‘Go on back to the stem. I’ve had a grand rest.’ 

For a while, with the brandy, I rowed easily and 
steadily. Then I began to catch crabs and soon I was 
just chopping along again with a thin brown taste of 
bile from having rowed too hard after the brandy. 

‘Give me a drink of water, will you?’ I said. 

‘That’s easy,’ Catherine said. 

290 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Before daylight it started to drizzle. The wind %Tas 
down or we were pro'^ected by mountains that bounded 
the curv’e the lake had made. When I knew daylight 
was coming I settled down and rowed hard. I did not 
know where we were and I wanted to get into the Swiss 
part of the lake. When it was beginning to be daylight 
we were quite close to the shore. I could see the rocky 
shore and the trees. 

^What’s that?’ Catherine said. I rested on the oars 
and listened. It was a motor-boat chugging out on the 
lake. I pulled close up to the shore and lay quiet. The 
chugging came closer; then wo saw the motor-boat in 
the rain a little astern of us. There were four guardia 
di finanza in the stern, their alpini]i2X.s, pulled down, their 
cape collars turned up and their carbines slung across 
their backs. They all looked sleepy so early in the morn- 
ing. I could see the yellow^ on their hats and the yellow 
marks on their cape collars. The motor-boat chugged 
on and out of sight in the rain. 

I pulled out into the lake. If we were that close to 
the border I did not want to be hailed by a sentry along 
the road. I stayed out where I could just see the shore 
and rowed on for three-quarters of an hour in the rain. 
We heard a motor-boat once more but I kept quiet until 
the noise of the engine tvent away across the lake. 

T think we’re in Smtzerland, Cat,’ I said. 

‘Really?’ 

‘There’s no way to know until we see Swiss troops.’ 

‘Or the Swiss navy.’ 

‘The Swiss navy’s no joke for us. That last motor- 
boat we heard w^as probably the Swiss navy.’ 

Tf we’re in Switzerland let’s have a big breakfast. They 
have wonderful rolls and butter and jam in Switzerland.’ 

291 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

It was clear daylight now and a fine rain was falling. 
The wind was still blowing outside up the lake and we 
could see the tops of the white-caps going away from us 
and up the lake. I was sure we were in Switzerland 
now. There were many houses back in the trees from 
the shore and up the shore a w^ay was a village with 
stone houses, some villas on the hills and a church. I 
had been looking at the road that skirted the shore for 
guards but did not see any. The road came quite close 
to the lake now and I saw a soldier coming out of a 
cafe on the road. He %vore a grey-green uniform and 
a helmet like the Germans. He had a healthy-iooking 
face and a little toothbrush moustache. He looked at us. 

‘Wave to him/ I said to Catherine. She waved and 
the soldier smiled embarrassedly and gave a wave of his 
hand. I eased up rowing. We were passing the water- 
front of the village. 

‘We must be well inside the border/ I said. 

‘We want to be sure, darling. We don’t want them 
to turn us back at the frontier.’ 

‘The frontier is a long way back. I think this is the 
customs town. I’m pretty sure it’s Brissago.’ 

‘Won’t there be Italians there? There are always 
both sides at a customs town.’ ■ 

‘Not in war-time. I don’t think they let the Italians 
cross the frontier.’ 

It was a nice-looking little town. There were many 
fishing-boats along the quay and nets were spread on 
racks. There was a fine November rain falling but it 
looked cheerful and clean even with the rain. 

‘Should we land then and have breakfast?’ 

‘All right.’ 

I pulled hard on the left oar and came in close, then 

zgz 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

straightened out when we were close to the quay and 
brought the boat alongside. I pulled in the oars, took 
hold of an iron ring, stepped up on the wet stone and 
was in Switzerland. I tied the boat and held my hand 

down to Catherine. 

‘Come on up, Cat. It’s a grand feeling.’ 

‘What about the bags?’ 

‘Leave them in the boat.’ 

Catherine stepped up and w'e were in Switzerland to- 
gether. 

‘What a lovely countr;v%’ she said. 

Tsn’t it grand?’ 

‘Let’s go and have breakfast!’ 

Tsn’t it a grand country? I love the way it feels under 
my shoes.’ 

T’m so stiff I can’t feel it very well. But it feels like 
a splendid country. Darling, do you realize we’re here 
and out of that bloody place?’ 

T do. I really do. I’ve never realized anything before.’ 

‘Look at the houses. Isn’t this a fine square? There’s 
a place we can get breakfast.’ 

‘Isn’t the rain fine? They never had rain like this in 
Italy. It’s cheerful rain.’ 

‘And we’re here, darling! Do you realize we’re here?’ 

We went inside the cafe and sat down at a clean 
wooden table. We were cockeyed excited. A splendid 
clean-looking woman with an apron came and asked us 
what we wanted. 

‘Rolls and jam and coffee,’ Catherine said. 

‘I’m sorry, we haven’t any rolls in war-time.’ 

‘Bread then.’ 

‘I can make you some toast.’ 

‘All right.’ 


^93 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T want some eggs fried too.’ 

‘How* many eggs for the gentleman?’ 

‘Three.’ 

‘Take four, darling.’ 

‘Four eggs.’ 

The woman went away. I kissed Catherine and held 
her hand ver}’’ tight. We looked at each other and at 
the cafe. 

‘Darling, darling, isn’t it lovely?’ 

‘It’s grand,’ I said. 

‘I don’t mind there not being rolls,’ Catherine said. 
‘I thought about them all night. But I don’t mind it. 
I don’t mind it at all.’ 

‘I suppose pretty soon they will arrest us.’ 

‘Never mind, darling. We’ll have breakfast first. 
You won’t mind being arrested after breakfast. And 
then there’s nothing they can do to us. We’re British 
and American citizens in good standing.’ 

‘You have a passport, haven’t you?’ 

‘Of course. Oh let’s not talk about it. Let’s be happy.’ 

‘I couldn’t be any happier,’ I said. A fat grey cat 
with a tail that lifted like a plume crossed the floor to 
our table and curved against my leg to purr each time 
she rubbed. I reached down and stroked her. Catherine 
smiled at me very happily. ‘Here comes the coffee,’ 
she said. 

They arrested us after breakfast. We took a little 
walk through the village then went down to the quay to 
get our bags. A soldier was standing guard over the boat. 

‘Is this your boat?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Where do you come from?’ 

294 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'Up the lake.' 

'Then I have to ask you to come with me.' 

'How about the bags?' 

'You can carry the bags.' 

I carried the bags and Catherine walked beside me 
and the soldier walked along behind us to the old custom- 
house. In the custom-house a lieutenant, very thin and 
miiitar}% questioned us. 

'What nationality are you?' 

'American and British.’ 

'Let me see your passports.' 

I gave him mine and Catherine got hers out of her 
handbag. 

He examined them for a long time. 

‘Why do you enter Switzerland this way in a boat?' 

‘I am a sportsman,' I said. ‘Rowing is my great sport. 
I always row when I get a chance.’ 

‘Why do you come here?' 

‘For the winter sport. We are tourists and we want 
to do the -winter sport.’ 

‘This is no place for winter sport.’ 

‘We know it. We want to go where they have the 
winter sport.' 

‘What have you been doing in Italy?' 

T have been studying architecture. My cousin has 
been studying art.' 

‘Why do you leave there?’ 

‘WY want to do the winter sport. With the war going 
on you cannot study architecture.' 

‘You will please stay w-here you are,’ the lieutenant 
said. He went back into the building with our passports. 

‘You’re splendid, darling,’ Catherine said. ‘Keep on 
the same track. You want to do the winter sport.' 

29s 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Do you know anything about art?’ 

'Rubens/ said Catherine. 

'Large and fat/ I said. 

'Titian/ Catherine said. 

'Titian-haired/ I said. 'How about Mantegna?’ 

'Don’t ask hard ones/ Catherine said. 'I know him 
though - very bitter.’ 

'Veiy^ bitter/ I said. 'Lots of nail holes.’ 

'You see I’ll make you a fine wife/ Catherine said. 
'I’ll be able to talk art with your customers.’ 

'Here he comes/ I said. The thin lieutenant came dowm 
the length of the custom house, holding our passports. 

'I will have to send you into Locarno/ he said. ‘You 
can get a carriage and a soldier will go in with you.’ 

'All right/ I said. 'What about the boat?’ 

'The boat is confiscated. What have you in those bags?’ 

He went all through the two bags and held up the 
quarter bottle of brandy. 'Would you join me in a drink?’ 
I asked. 

'No thank you.’ He straightened up. 'How much 
money have you?’ 

'Twenty-five hundred lire.’ 

He w^as favourably impressed. 'How much has your 
cousin?’ 

Catherine had a little over twelve hundred lire. The 
lieutenant was pleased. His attitude toward us became 
less haughty, 

'If you are going for winter sports,’ he said. 'Wengen 
is the place. My father has a very fine hotel at Wengen. 
It is open all the time.’ 

'That’s splendid,’ I said. 'Could you give me the name?’ 

‘I will write it on a card.’ He handed me the card 
very politely. 


296 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

"The soldier will take you into Locarno. He will 
keep your passports. I regret this but it is necessary, 
I have good hopes they will give you a visa or a police 
permit at Locarno." 

He handed the two passports to the soldier and carry- 
ing the bags we started into the village to order a carriage. 
'Hi/ the lieutenant called to the soldier. He said some- 
thing in a German dialect to him. The soldier slung his 
rifle on his back and picked up the bags. 

Tt's a great country/ I said to Catherine. 

Tt’s so practical." 

'Thank you very much/ I said to the lieutenant. 
He waved his hand. 

^Service!' he said. We followed our guard into the 
village. 

We drove to Locarno in a carriage with the soldier 
sitting on the front seat with the driver. At Locarno 
we did not have a bad time. They questioned us but 
they were polite because we had passports and money. 
I do not think they believed a word of the story and I 
thought it was silly but it was like a law court. You 
did not want something reasonable, you wanted some- 
thing technical and then stick to it without explana- 
tions. But we had passports and we would spend the 
money. So they gave us provisional visas. At any time 
these visas might be withdrawn. We were to report to 
the police wherever we went. 

Could we go wherever we wanted? Yes. Where did 
we want to go? 

‘Where do you want to go, Cat?" 

'Montreux." 

Tt is a very nice place," the official said. T think you 
will like that place." 


297 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'Here at Locarno is a very nice place/ another official 
said. T am sure you would like it here very much at 
Locarno. Locarno is a very attractive place/ 

'We would like some place where there is w^inter 
sport.' 

'There is no winter sport at Montreux 

T beg your pardon/ the other official said. T come 
from iVlontreux. There is very certainly winter sport 
on the Montreux Oberland Bemois railway. It w^ould 
be false for you to deny that.' 

T do not deny it. I simply said there is no winter 
sport at Montreux.' 

T question that/ the other official said. T question 
that statement/ 

T hold to that statement.' 

T question that statement. I myself have luge-ed 
into the streets of Montreux. I have done it not once 
but several times. Luge-ing is certainly winter sport.' 

The other official turned to me. 

Ts luge-ing your idea of winter sport, sir? I tell you 
you would be very comfortable here in Locarno. You 
would find the climate healthy, you would find the en- 
virons attractive. You would like it very much.' 

'The gentleman has expressed a wish to go to Mon- 
treux.' 

'What is luge-ing?’ I asked. 

‘You see he has never even heard of luge-ing!' 

That meant a great deal to the second official. He 
was pleased by that. 

'Luge-ing,' said the first official, 'is tobogganing.' 

'I beg to differ/ the other official shook his head. 
‘I must differ again. The toboggan is very different 
from the luge. The toboggan is constructed in Canada 

298 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

of flat laths. The luge is a common sled with riimiers. 
Accuracy means something^ 

‘Couldn’t we toboggan?’ I asked. 

‘Of course you could toboggan/ the first official 
said. ‘You could toboggan very well. Excellent Canadian 
toboggans are sold in IMontreux. Ochs Brothers sell 
toboggans. They import their own toboggans.’ 

The second official turned away. ‘Tobogganing/ he 
said, ‘requires a special piste. You could not toboggan 
into the streets of Montreux. Where are you stopping 
here?’ 

‘We don’t know/ I said. ‘We just drove in from 
Brissago. The carriage is outside.’ 

‘You make no mistake in going to Alontreux/ the 
first official said. ‘You will find the climate delightful 
and beautiful. You will have no distance to go for winter 
sport.’ 

‘If you really want winter sport/ the second official 
said, ‘you will go to the Engadine or to Miirren. I must 
protest against your being advised to go to Montreux for 
the winter sport.’ 

‘At Les A%"ants above Montreux there is excellent 
winter sport of every sort.’ The champion of Montreux 
glared at his colleague. 

‘Gentlemen/ I said, ‘I am afraid 'we must go. Aly 
cousin is very tired. We will go tentatively to IMontreux.’ 

‘I congratulate you,’ the first official shook my hand. 

‘I believe that you will regret leaving Locarno/ the 
second official said. ‘At any rate you will report to the 
police at Montreux.’ 

‘There will be no unpleasantness with the police/ 
the first official assured me. ‘You will find all the in- 
habitants extremely courteous and friendly.’ 

399 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

"Thank you both very much/ I said. "We appreciate 
your advice veiy" much." 

"Good-bye," Catherine said. "Thank you both verj" 
much." 

They bowed us to the door, the champion of Locarno 
a little coldly. We went down the steps and into the 
carriage. 

"My God, darling," Catherine said. "Couldn’t we 
have gotten away any sooner.^" I gave the name of a 
hotel one of the officials had recommended to the driver. 
He picked up the reins. 

"You’ve forgotten the army," Catherine said. The 
soldier was standing by the carriage. I gave him a ten- 
lira note. "I have no Swiss money yet," I said. He 
thanked me, saluted and w^ent off. The carriage started 
and we drove to the hotel. 

"How did you happen to pick out Montreux.?" I asked 
Catherine. "Do you really want to go there?" 

"It was the first place I could think of," she said. "It’s 
not a bad place. We can find some place up in the moun- 
tains." 

"Are you sleepy?" 

‘I"m asleep right now." 

‘We’ll get a good sleep. Poor Cat, you had a long bad 
night." 

"I had a lovely time,’ Catherine said. "Especially 
when you sailed with the umbrella." 

"Can you realize w^e’re in Switzerland?" 

"No, I’m afraid I’ll wake up and it won’t be true." 

"I am too." 

"It is true, isn’t it, darling? I’m not just driving down 
to the stazione in Milan to see you off." 

"I hope not." 


300 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

* Don't say that. It frightens me. Maybe that’s where 
we’re going.’ 

T'm so groggy I don’t know/ I said. 

'Let me see your hands.’ 

I put them out. They were both blistered raw. 

'There’s no hole in my side/ I said. 

'Don’t be sacrilegious.’ 

I felt veiy tired and vague in the head. The exhii- 
aration was all gone. The carriage was going along the 
street. 

'Poor hands/ Catherine said. 

'Don’t touch them/ I said. 'By God I don’t know 
where we are. Where are we going, driver?’ The driver 
stopped his horse. 

'To the Hotel Metropole. Don’t you want to go 
there?’ 

'Yes/ I said. 'It’s all right, Cat.’ 

'It’s all right, darling. Don’t be upset. Well get a 
good sleep and you won’t feel groggy to-morrow.’ 

T get pretty groggy/ I said. 'It’s like a comic opera 
to-day. Maybe I’m hungry.’ 

'You’re just tired, darling. You’ll be fine.’ The 
carriage pulled up before the hotel. Someone came out 
to take our bags. 

'I feel all right,’ I said. We were down on the pavement 
going into the hotel. 

'I know you’ll be all right. You’re just tired. You’ve 
been up a long time.’ 

'Anyhow we’re here.’ 

'Yes, we’re really here.’ 

We followed the boy with the bags into the hotel. 


301 






CHAPTER 3S 


That fall the snow came %’'er\'' late. We lived in a brown 
wooden house in the pine trees on the side of the moun- 
tain and at night there was frost so that there was thin 
ice over the water in the tw'o pitchers on the dresser 
in the morning* Airs. Guttingen came into the room 
early in the morning to shut the windows and started 
a fire in the tall porcelain stove. The pine wood crackled 
and sparkled and then the fire roared in the stove and 
the second time Airs. Guttingen came into the room 
she brought big chunks of wood for the fire and a pitcher 
of hot water. When the room was ’warm she brought 
in breakfast. Sitting up in bed eating breakfast we 
could see the lake and the mountains across the lake 
on the French side. There was snow on the tops of 
the mountains and the lake was a grey steel-blue. 

Outside, in front of the chalet a road went up the 
mountain. The wheel-ruts and ridges were iron hard 
with the frost, and the road climbed steadily through 
the forest and up and around the mountain to where 
there were meadows, and barns and cabins in the 
meadows at the edge of the woods looking across the 
valley. The valley was deep and there was a stream at 
the bottom that flowed down into the lake and when 
the wind blew across the valley you could hear the stream 
in the rocks. 

Sometimes we went oif the road and on a path through 
the pine forest. The floor of the forest was soft to walk 

^ 305 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

on; the froJt did not harden it as it did the road. But 
we did not mind the hardness of the road because we 
had nails in the soles and heels of our boots and the 
heel nails bit on the frozen ruts and with nailed boots it 
was good walking on the road and invigorating. But it 
was lovely walking in the woods. 

In front of the house where we lived the mountain 
w^ent down steeply to the little plain along the lake and 
we sat on the porch of the house in the sun and saw 
the winding of the road down the mountain-side and 
the terraced vineyards on the side of the lower mountain, 
the vines all dead now for the winter and the fields 
divided by stone walls, and below the vineyards the 
houses of the town on the narrow plain along the lake 
shore. There was an island with two trees on the lake 
and the trees looked like the double sails of a fishing- 
boat. The mountains were sharp and steep on the other 
side of the lake and down at the end of the lake was 
the plain of the Rhone Valley flat between the two 
ranges of mountains; and up the valley where the moun- 
tains cut it off was the Dent du Midi. It was a high 
snowy mountain and it dominated the valley but it was 
so far away that it did not make a shadow. 

When the sun was bright we ate lunch on the porch 
but the rest of the time we ate upstairs in a small room 
with plain wooden walls and a big stove in the comer. 
We bought books and magazines in the town and a 
copy of Hoyle and learned many two-handed card games. 
The small room with the stove was our living-room. 
There were two comfortable chairs and a table for books 
and magazines and we played cards on the dining-table 
when it was cleared away. Mr. and Mrs. Guttingen 
lived downstairs and we w^ould hear them talking some- 

306 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

times in the evening and they were very happy together 
too. He had been a head waiter and she had worked 
as maid in the same hotel and they had saved their 
money to buy this place. They had a son who was 
sVidyinr to be a head waiter. He was at a hotel in Zurich. 
Downstairs there was a parlour where they sold wine 
and beer, and sometimes in the evening we would hear 
carts stop outside on the road and men come up the steps 
to go in the parlour to drink wine. 

There was a box of wood in the hall outside the living- 
room and I kept up the fire from it. But we did not 
stay up very late. We went to bed in the dark in the 
big bedroom and when I w'as undressed I opened the 
windows and saw the night and the cold stars and the 
pine trees below the window and then got into bed as 
fast as I could. It was lovely in bed with the air so cold 
and clear and the night outside the window. We slept 
well and if I woke in the night I knew it was from only 
one cause and I would shift the feather bed over, 
ver\" softly so that Catherine would not be wakened, 
and then go back to sleep again, warm and with the 
new lightness of thin covers. The war seemed far 
away. But I knew from the papers that they were 
still fighting in the mountains because the snow would 
not come. 

Sometimes we walked down the mountain into IMon- 
treux. There w'as a path went down the mountain but 
it was steep and so usually we took the road and walked 
down on the wide hard road between fields and then 
below betv-een the stone walls of the vineyards and on 
down between the houses of the villages along the way. 
There were three villages Chemex, Fontanivant, and 

307 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

the other I forget. Then along the road we passed an 
old square-built stone chateau on a ledge on the side of 
the mountain-side with the terraced fields of vines, 
each vine tied to a stick to hold it up, the vines dry and 
brown and the earth ready for the snow and the lake 
down below fiat and grey as steel. The road went down 
a long grade below the chateau and then turned to the 
right and went down very steeply and paved with cobbles, 
into Montreux. 

We did not know anyone in Montreux. We walked 
along beside the lake and saw the swans and the many 
gulls and terns that flew up when you came close and 
screamed while they looked down at the water. Out on 
the lake there were flocks of grebes, small and dark, 
and leaving trails in the water when they swam. In 
the town w^e walked along the main street and looked 
in the windows of the shops. There w'ere many big 
hotels that were closed but most of the shops were open 
and the people w-ere very glad to see us. There was a 
fine coiffeur’s place where Catherine went to have her 
hair done. The woman who ran it was very cheerful 
and the only person we knew in Montreux. While 
Catherine was there I went up to a beer place and 
drank dark Munich beer and read the papers. I read 
the Corriere della Sera and the English and American 
papers from Paris. All the advertisements w^ere blacked 
out, supposedly to prevent communication in that way 
with the enemy. The papers were bad reading. Every- 
thing was going very badly ever}"where. I sat back in 
the corner with a heavy mug of dark beer and an opened 
glazed-paper package of pretzels and ate the pretzels for 
the salty flavour and the good way they made the beer 
taste and read about disaster. I thought Catherine 

308 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

woiiid come by but she did not come so I hung the papers 
back on the rack, paid for my beer and went up the 
street to look for her. The day was cold and dark and 
wintf}’ and the stone of the houses looked cold, Catherine 
was still in the hairdresser’s shop. The woman was 
waving her hair. I sat in the little booth and watched. 
It was exciting to watch and Catherine smiled and talked 
to me and my voice was a little thick from being excited. 
The tongs made a pleasant clicking sound and I could 
see Catherine in three mirrors and it was pleasant and 
warm in the booth. Then the woman put up Catherine’s 
hair, and Catherine looked in the mirror and changed it 
a little, taking out and putting in pins; then stood up. T’m 
sorry to have taken such a long timed 

‘Alonsieur was very interested. Were you not, mon- 
sieur?’ the woman smiled. 

‘Yes,’ I said. 

We went out and up the street. It was cold and wintry 
and the wind was blowing. ‘Oh, darling, I love you so,’ 
I said. 

‘Don’t we have a fine time?’ Catherine said. ‘Look. 
Let’s go some place and have beer instead of tea. It’s 
Yory good for young Catherine. It keeps her small.’ 

‘Young Catherine,’ I said. ‘That loafer,’ 

‘She’s been very" good,’ Catherine said. ‘She makes 
very little trouble. The doctor says beer will be good 
for me and keep her small.’ 

Tf you keep her small enough and she’s a boy, maybe 
he will be a jockey.’ 

T suppose if we really have this child we ought to 
get married,’ Catherine said. We w^ere in the beer place at 
the comer table. It was getting dark outside. It was still 
early but the day was dark and the dusk was coming early. 

309 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Let’s get married now,’ I said. 

‘No,’ Catherine said. ‘It’s too embarrassing now. I 
show too plainly. I won’t go before anyone and be married 
in this state.’ 

‘I \rish we’d gotten married.’ 

‘I suppose it would have been better. But when 
could we, darling?’ 

‘I don’t know.’ 

‘I know one thing. I’m not going to be married in 
this splendid matronly state.’ 

‘You’re not matronly.’ 

‘Oh, yes, I am, darling. The hairdresser asked me 
if this was our first. I lied and said no, we had two 
boys and two girls.’ 

‘When will we be married?’ 

‘Any time after I’m thin again. We want to have a 
splendid wedding with eveiy'one thinking what a hand- 
some young couple.’ 

‘And you’re not worried?’ 

‘Darling, why should I be worried? The only time I 
ever felt badly was when I felt like a whore in Milan, 
and that only lasted seven minutes and besides it was 
the room furnishings. Don’t I make you a good wife?’ 

‘You’re a lovely wife.’ 

‘Then don’t be too technical, darling. I’U marry you 
as soon as I’m thin again.’ 

‘All right.’ 

‘Do you think I ought to drink another beer? The 
doctor said I was rather narrow in the hips and it’s all 
for the best if we keep young Catherine small.’ 

‘What else did he say?’ I was worried. 

Nothing. I have a wonderful blood-pressure, darling. 
He admired my blood-pressure greatly.’ 

310 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'What did he say about you being too narrow in the 
hips?* 

'Xothing. Xothing at all. He said I shouldn't ski.’ 

'Quite right.’ 

'He said it was too late to start if I’d never done it 
before. He said I could ski if I wouldn’t fall down.’ 

'He’s just a hig-har.rted joker.’ 

'Really he was very nice. Well have him when the 
baby comes.’ 

'Did you ask him if you ought to get married?’ 

'Xo. I told him we’d been married four years. You 
secj dariingj if I many- you III be an American and 
an}^ time we’re married under American law the child 
is legitimate.’ 

'Where did you find that out?’ 

'In the Xew York World Almanac in the library.’ 

'You’re a grand girl.’ 

'I’ll be very glad to be an American and well go to 
America, won’t we, darling? I want to see Xiagara 
Falls.’ 

'You’re a fine girl.’ 

'There’s something else I want to see but I can’t 
remember it/ 

'The stockyards?’ 

'No. I can’t remember it.’ 

'The Woolworth building?’ 

'No.’ 

'The Grand Canyon?’ 

'No. But I’d like to see that.’ 

'What was it?’ 

'The Golden Gate! That’s what I want to see. Where 
is the Golden Gate?’ 

'San Francisco/ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Then let’s go there. I want to see San Francisco 
an way.’ 

‘All right. We’ll go there.’ 

‘Now let’s go up the mountain. Should we? Can we 
get the M.O.B.?’ 

‘There’s a train a little after five.’ 

‘Let’s get that.’ 

‘All right. I’ll drink one more beer first.’ 

When we went out to go up the street and climb the 
stairs to the station it was very cold. A cold wind was 
coming down the Rhone valley. There were lights in 
the shop windows and we climbed the steep stone stair- 
way to the upper street, then up another stair to the 
station. The electric train was there waiting, all the lights 
on. There was a dial that showed when it left. The 
clock hands pointed to ten minutes after five. I looked 
at the station clock. It was five minutes after. As we 
got on board I saw the motoiman and conductor coming 
out of the station wine-shop. We sat down and opened 
the window. The train was electrically heated and 
stuffy but fresh cold air came in through the window. 

‘Are you tired. Cat?’ I asked. 

‘No. I feel splendid.’ 

‘It isn’t a long ride.’ 

‘I like the ride,’ she said. ‘Don’t worry about me, 
darling. I feel fine.’ 

Snow did not come until three days before Christ- 
mas. We woke one morning and it was snowing. We 
stayed in bed with the fire roaring in the stove and 
watched the snow fall. Mrs. Guttingen took away the 
breakfast trays and put more wood in the stove. It 
was a big snowstorm. She said it had started about 

312 



A FAAhV.TiLL TO ARMS 

midnight. I went to the window and looked out but 
could not see across the road. It was blowing and 
snowing wildly, I went back to bed and we Izy and 

talked. 

'I wish I could ski,’ Catherine said. Tt’s rotten not 
to be able to ski.’ 

‘Well get a bobsled and come down the road. That’s 
no worse for you than riding in a car.’ 

‘Won’t it be rough?’ 

‘We can see.’ 

‘I hope it won’t be too rough.’ 

‘After a while well take a walk in the snow.’ 

‘Before lunch,’ Catherine said, ‘so well have a good 
appetite.’ 

T’m always hungry,’ 

‘So am L’ 

AVe went out in the snow but it was drifted so that 
we could not walk far. I w^ent ahead and made a trail 
down to the station but w’hen we reached there w'e had 
gone far enough. The snow w^as blowing so W'e could 
hardly see and w^e went into the little inn by the station, 
and swept each other off with a broom and sat on a 
bench and had vermouths. 

‘It is a big storm,’ the barmaid said. 

‘Yes.’ 

‘The snow" is very late this year.’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘Could I eat a chocolate bar?’ Catherine asked. ‘Or 
is it too close to lunch? I’m ahvays hungry.’ 

‘Go on and eat one,’ I said. 

‘I’ll take one with filberts,’ Catherine said. 

‘They are very good,’ the girl said, ‘I like them the 
best.’ 

313 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Tli have another vermouth/ I said. 

When we came out to start back up the road our 
track was filled in by the snow. There were only faint 
indentations where the holes had been. The snow blew 
in our faces so we could hardly see. We brushed off 
and went in to have lunch. Mr. Guttingen served the 
lunch. 

'To-morrow there will be ski-ing/ he said. 'Do you 
ski, Mr. Henr}’?’ 

'No. But I want to learn.’ 

'You will learn very easily. My boy will be here for 
Christmas and he will teach you.’ 

'That’s fine. When does he come?’ 

'To-morrow night.’ 

"When we were sitting by the stove in the little room 
after lunch looking out the window at the snow coming 
down Catherine said, 'Wouldn’t you like to go on a 
trip somewhere by yourself, darling, and be with men 
and ski?’ 

'No. Why should I?’ - 

‘I should think sometimes you would w^ant to see other 
people besides me/ 

'Do you want to see other people?’ 

'No.’ 

'Neither do I.’ 

‘I know. But you’re different. I’m having a child 
and that makes me contented not to do anything. I know 
I’m awfully stupid now and I talk too much, and I think 
you ought to get away so you won’t be tired of me.’ 

'Do you want me to go away?’ 

'No. I want you to stay.’ 

'That’s what I’m going to do.’ 

'Come over here,’ she said. 'I want to feel the bump 

314 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


OB your head. Its a big bump.’ She ran her finger 
over it. 'Darlings would you like to grow a beard?’ 

"Would you like me to?’ 

"It might be fun. Fd like to see you with a beard.’ 

"All right. Ill grow one. Ill start now, this minute. 
It’s a good idea. It will give me sometliing to do.’ 

"Are you worried because you haven’t anjlhing to do?’ 

"Xo. I like it. I have a fine life. Don’t you?’ 

T have a lovely life. But I was afraid because Fm big 
now that maybe I was a bore to you.’ 

"Oh, Cat. You don’t know how crazy I am about you.’ 

"This way?’ 

"Just the way you are. I have a fine time. Don’t we 
have a good life?’ 

‘I do, but I thought maybe you were restless.’ 

"Xo. Sometimes I wonder about the front and about 
people I know but I don’t woriyu I don’t think about 
anything much.’ 

"Who do you wonder about?’ 

"About Rinaldi and the priest and lots of people I 
know. But I don’t think about them much. I don’t want 
to think about the war. I’m through with it.’ 

"What are you thinking about now?’ 

"Nothing.’ 

"Yes you were. Tell me.’ 

‘I was wondering whether Rinaldi had the syphilis.’ 

"Was that all?’ 

"Yes.’ 

"Has he the syphilis?’ 

"I don’t know.’ 

"Fm glad you haven’t. Did you ever have anything 
like that?’ 

"I had gonorrhea.’ 


315 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

T don’t want to hear about it. Was it very painful, 
darling?’ 

‘Very.’ 

T wish I’d had it.’ 

‘No you don’t.’ 

‘I do. I wish I’d had it to be like you. I wish I’d 
stayed with ail your girls so I could make fun of them 
to you.’ 

‘That’s a pretty picture.’ 

‘It’s not a pretty picture you having gonorrhea.’ 

‘I know it. Look at it snowing now.’ 

‘I’d rather look at you. Darling, why don’t you let 
your hair grow?’ 

‘How grow'?’ 

‘Just grow a little longer.’ 

‘It’s long enough now.’ 

‘No, let it grow a little longer and I could cut mine 
and we’d be just alike only one of us blonde and one of 
us dark.’ 

‘I wouldn’t let you cut yours.’ 

‘It would be fun. I’m tired of it. It’s an awful nuisance 
in the bed at night.’ 

‘I like it.’ 

‘Wouldn’t you like it short?’ 

‘I might. I like it the way it is.’ 

‘It might be nice short. Then we’d both be alike. 
Oh, darling, I want you so much I want to be you 
too.’ 

‘You are. We’re the same one.’ 

‘I know it. At night we are.’ 

‘The nights are grand.’ 

‘I want us to be all mixed up. I don’t want you to 
go away. I just said that. You go if you want to. But 

316 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


hurry right back. Why, darling, I don’t live at all when 
I’m not with you.’ 

‘I won’t ever go away,’ I said. ‘I’m no good when 
you’re not there. I haven’t any life at all any more.’ 

‘I want you to have a life. I want you to have a fine 
life. But we’ll have it together, won’t we?’ 

‘And now do you want me to stop growing my beard 
or let it go on?’ 

‘Go on. Grow it. It will be exciting. Alaybe it will 
be done for Xew' Year’s.’ 

‘Now do you want to play chess?’ 

‘I’d rather play wdth you.’ 

‘Xo. Let’s play chess.’ 

‘And afterward we’ll play?’ 

‘Yes.’ 

‘All right.’ 

I got out the chess-board and arranged the pieces. 
It was still snow’ing hard outside. 

One time in the night I woke up and knew that 
Catherine was awake too. The moon was shining in 
the window and made shadows on the bed from the 
bars on the window’-panes. 

‘Are you awake, sweetheart?’ 

‘Yes. Can’t you sleep?’ 

‘I just woke up thinMng about how I was nearly crazy 
when I first met you. Do you remember?’ 

‘You were just a little crazy.’ 

‘I’m never that way any more. I’m grand now. You 
say grand so sweetly. Say grand.’ 

‘Grand.’ 

‘Oh, you’re sweet. And I’m not crazy now. I’m just 
very, very, very happy.’ 


317 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘Go on to sleep,’ I said. 

‘All right. Let’s go to sleep at exactly the same moment.’ 
‘All right.’ 

But we did not. I was awake for quite a long time 
thinking about things and watching Catherine sleeping, 
the moonlight on her face. Then I went to sleep, too. 


CHAPTER 39 

By the middle of January I had a beard and the winter 
had settled into bright cold days and hard cold nights. 
W e could walk on the roads again. The snow was 
packed hard and smooth by the hay-sleds and wood- 
sleds and the logs that were hauled down the mountain. 
The snow lay over all the country, down almost to 
Montreux. The mountains on the other side of the lake 
were all white and the plain of the Rhone valley was 
cov'ered. We took long walks on the other side of the 
mountain to the Bains d’Alliez. Catherine wore hob- 
nailed boots and a cape and carried a stick with a sharp 
steel point. She did not look big with the cape and w'e 
would not w'alk too fast but stopped and sat on logs by 
the roadside to rest when she was tired. 

There was an inn in the trees at the Bains d’Alliez 
where the wroodcutters stopped to drink, and we sat 
inside warmed by the stove and drank hot red wine 
with spices and lemon in it. They called it gluhwein and 
it was a good thing to warm you and to celebrate with. 
The inn was dark and smoky inside and afterward 
when you went out the cold air came sharply into your 

318 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


lungs and numbed the edge of your nose as you inhaled. 
We looked back at the inn with light coming from the 
windows and the woodcutters" horses stamping and 
jerking their heads outside to keep warm. There was 
frost on the hairs of their muzzles and their breathing 
made plumes of frost in the air. Going up the road 
toward home the road was smooth and slippery for a 
while and the ice orange from the horses until the wood- 
hauling track turned off. Then the road was clean-packed 
snow and led through the woods, and twice coming home 
in the evening we saw foxes. 

It was a fine country and every time that we vrent out 
it was fun. 

'You have a splendid beard now/ Catherine said. 
Tt looks just like the woodcutters". Did you see the 
man with the tiny gold earrings?" 

'He"s a chamois hunter," I said. 'They wear them 
because they say it makes them hear better." 

'Really? I don’t believe it. I think theywear them to show 
they are chamois hunters. Are there chamois near here?" 

'Yes, beyond the Dent du Jaman." 

'It was fun seeing the fox." 

'When he sleeps he wraps that tail around him to keep 
warm." 

Tt must be a lovely feeling." 

T always wanted to have a tail like that. Wouldn"t it 
be fun if we had brushes like a fox?" 

Tt might be very difficult dressing." 

'We"d have clothes made, or live in a country where 
it wouldn’t make any difference." 

'We live in a country where nothing makes any differ- 
ence. Isn’t it grand how we never see anyone? You 
don’t want to see people, do you, darling?" 

3^9 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘No.’ 

‘Should we sit here just a minute? I’m a little bit 
tired.’ 

We sat close together on the logs. Ahead the road 
went down through the forest. 

‘She won’t come between us, will she? The little 
brat.’ 

‘No. We won’t let her.’ 

‘How’ are w^e for money?’ 

‘We have plenty. They honoured the last sight draft.’ 

‘Won’t your family try and get hold of you now they 
know you’re in Switzerland?’ 

‘Probably. I’ll w'rite them something.’ 

‘Haven’t you written them?’ 

‘No. Only the sight draft.’ 

‘Thank God I’m not your fanndly.’ 

‘I’ll send them a cable.’ 

‘Don’t you care anything about them?’ 

‘I did, but we quarrelled so much it wore itself out.’ 

‘I think I’d like them. I’d probably like them very 
much.’ 

‘Let’s not talk about them or I’ll start to w'orry about 
them.’ After a while I said, ‘Let’s go on if you’re rested.’ 

‘I’m rested.’ 

We went on down the road. It was dark now and 
the snow squeaked under our boots. The night was dry 
and cold and very clear. 

‘I love your beard,’ Catherine said. ‘It’s a great suc- 
cess. It looks so stiff and fierce and it’s very soft and a 
great pleasure.’ 

‘Do you like it better than without?’ 

‘I think so. You know, darling, I’m not going to cut 
my hair now until after young Catherine’s bom. I 

320 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


look too big and matronly now. But after she’s born 
and I’m thin again I’m going to cut it and then I’ll be 
a fine new and different girl for you. We’ll go together 
and get it cut, or I’ll go alone and come and surprise 
you.’ 

I did not say ar.whing. 

‘You won’t say I can’t, will you?’ 

‘No. I think it would be exciting.’ 

‘Oh, you’re so sweet. And maybe I’d look lovely, 
darling, and be so thin and exciting to you and you’ll 
fall in love with me all over again.’ 

‘Hell,’ I said, ‘I love you enough now. What do you 
want to do? Ruin me?’ 

‘Yes. I want to ruin you.’ 

‘Good,’ I said, ‘that’s what I want too.’ 


CHAPTER 40 

We had a fine life. We lived through the months of 
January and February and the winter was very fine 
and we were happy. There had been short thaws 
when the wind blew warm and the snow softened and 
the air felt like Spring, but always the clear hard cold 
had come again and the winter had returned. In March 
came the first break in the -winter. In the night it started 
raining. It rained on all morning and turned the snow 
to slush and made the mountain-side dismal. There 
were clouds over the lake and over the valley. It -was 
raining high up the mountain. Catherine wore heavy 
overshoes and I wore Mr. Guttingen’s rubber-boots 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

and we walked to the station under an umbrella, through 
the slush and the running water that was washing the 
ice of the roads bare, to stop at the pub before lunch for 
a vermouth. Outside w’e could hear the rain. 

‘Do you think we ought to move into town?’ 

‘What do you think?’ Catherine asked. 

Tf the winter is over and the rain keeps up it won’t 
be fun up here. How long is it before young Catherine?’ 

‘About a month. Perhaps a little more.’ 

‘We might go down and stay in Montreux.’ 

‘Why don’t we go to Lausanne? That’s where the 
hospital is.’ 

‘All right. But I thought maybe that was too big a 
town.’ 

‘We can be as much alone in a bigger town and Lausanne 
might be nice.’ 

‘When should we go?’ 

‘I don’t care. Whenever you want, darling. I don’t 
want to leave here if you don’t want.’ 

‘Let’s see how the weather turns out.’ 

It rained for three days. The snow" was all gone now 
on the mountain-side below the station. The road w^as 
a torrent of muddy snow-water. It w^as too wet and 
slushy to go out. On the morning of the third day of 
rain we decided to go down into town. 

‘That is all right, Mr. Henry,’ Guttingen said. ‘You 
do not have to give me any notice. I did not think you 
would want to stay now the bad weather is come.’ 

‘We have to be near the hospital an)w\^ay on account 
of Madame,’ I said. 

‘I understand,’ he said. ‘Will you come back some 
time and stay, with the little one?’ 

‘Yes, if you would have room.’ 

333 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Tn the Spring when it is nice you could come and 
enjoy it. We could put the little one and the nurse in 
the big room that is closed now and you and iMadame 
could have your same room looking out over the lake/ 

Til write about coming/ I said. We packed and 
left on the train that went down after lunch. Air. and 
Airs. Guttingen came down to the station with us and 
he hauled our baggage down on a sled through the slush. 
They stood beside the station in the rain waving good-b3’e. 

‘They were very sweet/ Catherine said. 

‘They were fine to us/ 

We took the train to Lausanne from Alontreux. 
Looking out the window toward where we had lived 
you could not see the mountains for the clouds. The 
train stopped in Vevey, then went on, passing the lake 
on one side and on the other the wet brown fields and 
the bare woods and the wet houses. We came into 
Lausanne and went into a medium-sized hotel to stay* 
It was still raining as we drove through the streets and 
into the carriage entrance of the hotel. The concierge 
with brass keys on his lapels, the elevator, the carpets 
on the floors and the white washbowls with shining 
fixtures, the brass bed and the big comfortable bed- 
room all seemed very great luxuiy- after the Guttingensl 
The windows of the room looked out on a wet garden 
with a wall topped by an iron fence. Across the street, 
which sloped steepty, was another hotel with a similar 
wall and garden. I looked out at the rain falling in the 
fountain of the garden. 

Catherine turned on all the lights and commenced 
unpacking. I ordered a whisky and soda and lay on 
the bed and read the papers I had bought at the station. 
It was A larch 191S, and the German offensive had 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

started in France. I drank the whisky and soda and read 
while Catherine unpacked and moved around the room. 

‘You know what I have to get, darling,’ she said. 

‘What?’ 

‘Baby clothes. There aren’t many people reach my 
time without baby things.’ 

‘You can buy them.’ 

‘I know. That’s what I’ll do to-morrow. I’ll fin d 
out what is necessary.’ 

‘You ought to know. You were a nurse.’ 

‘But so few of the soldiers had babies in the hospitals.’ 
‘I did.’ 

She hit me with the pillow and spilled the whisky 
and soda. 

‘I’ll order you another,’ she said. ‘I’m sorry I spilled it.’ 

‘There wasn’t much left. Come on over to the bed.’ 

‘No. I have to try and make this room look like some- 
thing.’ 

‘Like what?’ 

‘Like our home.’ 

‘Hang out the Allied flags,’ 

‘Oh shut up.’ 

‘Say it again.’ 

‘Shut up.’ 

‘You say it so cautiously,’ I said. ‘As though you didn’t 
want to offend anyone.’ 

‘I don’t.’ 

‘Then come over to the bed.’ 

‘All right.’ She came and sat on the bed. ‘I know 
I’m no fun for you, darling. I’m like a big flour-barrel.’ 

‘No you’re not. You’re beautiful and you’re sweet.’ 

‘I’m just something very ungainly that you’ve married.’ 

‘No you’re not. You’re more beautiful all the time.’ 

324 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'But I will be thin again, darling.’ 

'You're thin now.’ 

'You’ve been drinking.’ 

'Just whisky and soda.’ 

'There’s another one coming,’ she said. 'And then 
should we order dinner up here?’ 

'That will be good.’ 

'Then we w'on’t go out, will we? 'Well just stay in 
to-night.’ 

'And play,’ I said. 

‘I’ll drink some wine.’ Catherine said, Tt w’on’t 
hurt me. Maybe -we can get some of our old white 
capri.’ 

T know we can,’ I said. 'They 11 have Italian wines 
at a hotel this size,’ 

The waiter knocked at the door. He brought the 
whisky in a glass with ice and beside the glass on a tray 
a small bottle of soda. 

‘Thank you,’ I said. 'Put it dowm there. Will you 
please have dinner for two brought up here and two 
bottles of drj’' white capri in ice.’ 

'Do you wish to commence your dinner with soup?’ 

‘Do you want soup, Cat?’ 

'Please,’ 

'Bring soup for one.’ 

'Thank you, sir.’ He w'ent out and shut the door. 
I went back to the papers and the w’ar in the papers, and 
poured the soda slowly over the ice into the whisky. I 
would have to tell them not to put ice in the w'hisky. Let 
them bring the ice separately. That way you could tell 
how' much whisky there was and it would not suddenly 
be too thin from the soda, I would get a bottle of whisky 
and have them bring ice and soda. That was the sensible 

3^5 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

way. Good whisky was very pleasant. It was one of 
the pleasant parts of life. 

‘What are you thinking, darling?’ 

‘About w^hisky.’ 

‘WTiat about w'hisky?’ 

‘About how' nice it is.’ 

Catherine made a face. ‘All right,’ she said. 

We stayed at that hotel three w-eeks. It was not 
bad; the dining-room w’^as usually empty and very often 
we ate in our room at night. We walked in the town 
and took the cogwheel railway down to Ouchy and 
walked beside the lake. The weather became quite 
warm and it was like Spring. We wished w'^e were back 
in the mountains but the Spring weather lasted only a 
few days and then the cold rawness of the breaking up 
of winter came again. 

Catherine bought the things she needed for the baby 
up in the towm. I went to a gymnasium in the arcade 
to box for exercise. I usually w'ent up there in the 
morning while Catherine stayed late in bed. On the 
days of false Spring it was very nice, after boxing and 
taking a shower, to walk along the streets smelling the 
Spring in the air and stop at a cafe to sit and w’atch 
the people and read the paper and drink a vermouth; 
then go down to the hotel and have lunch with Catherine. 
The professor at the boxing gymnasium wore moustaches 
and was very precise and jerky and w'ent all to pieces 
if you started after him. But it was pleasant in the gym. 
There was good air and light and I worked quite hard, 
skipping rope, shadow-boxing, doing abdominal exer- 
cises lying on the floor in a patch of sunlight that came 
through the open window, and occasionally scaring the 

326 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


professor when we boxed. I could not shadow-box in 
front of the narrow long mirror at first because it looked 
so strange to see a man with a beard boxing. But finally 
I just thought it was funny. I wanted to take off the 
beard as soon as I started boxing but Catherine did not 
want me to. 

Sometimes Catherine and I went for rides out in 
the country in a carriage. It was nice to ride w’hen the 
days were pleasant and we found two good places where 
we could ride out to eat. Catherine could not walk very 
far now and I loved to ride out along the country roads 
with her. When there was a good day we had a splendid 
time and we never had a bad time. We knew the baby 
was very close now and it gave us both a feeling as though 
something were hurrying us and we could not lose any 
time together. 


CHAPTER 41 

One morning I awoke about three o’clock hearing 
Catherine stirring in the bed. 

‘Are you ail right. Cat?’ 

‘I’ve been having some pains, darling.’ 

‘Regularly?’ 

‘No, not very.’ 

‘If you have them at all regularly we’ll go to the 
hospital.’ 

I was very sleepy and went back to sleep. A little 
while later I woke again. 

‘Maybe you’d better call up the doctor,’ Catherine 
said. ‘I think maybe this is it.’ 

327 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

I went to the phone and called the doctor. ‘How often 
are the pains coming?’ he asked. 

‘How often are they coming, Cat?’ 

T should think every quarter of an hour.’ 

‘You should go to the hospital then,’ the doctor said. 
T will dress and go there right away myself.’ 

I hung up and called the garage near the station to 
send up a taxi. No one answered the phone for a long 
time. Then I finally got a man who promised to send 
up a taxi at once. Catherine was dressing. Her bag 
was all packed with the things she would need at the 
hospital and the baby things. Outside in the hall I 
rang for the elevator. There was no answer. I went 
downstairs. There was no one downstairs except the 
night-watchman. I brought the elevator up myself, 
put Catherine’s bag in it, she stepped in and w^e w^ent 
down. The night-watchman opened the door for us 
and we sat outside on the stone slabs beside the stairs 
down to the driveway and waited for the taxi. The 
night was clear and the stars were out. Catherine was 
very excited. 

T’m so glad it’s started,’ she said. ‘Now in a little 
while it will be all over.’ 

‘You’re a good brave girl.’ 

T’m not afraid. I wish the taxi would come, though.’ 

We heard it coming up the street and saw its head- 
lights. It turned into the drivew’^ay and I helped Catherine 
in and the driver put the bag up in front. 

‘Drive to the hospital,’ I said. 

We went out of the driveway and started up the hill. 

At the hospital we went in and I carried the bag. 
There was a w^oman at the desk who wrote down 
Catherine’s name, age, address, relatives and religion, 

328 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


in a book. She said she had no religion and the woman 
drew a line in the space after that word. She gave her 
name as Catherine Henry. 

T will take you up to your room/ she said. We went 
up in an elevator. The woman stopped it and we stepped 
out and followed her dowm a hall. Catherine held tight 
to my arm. 

'This is the room/ the woman said. ‘Will you please 
undress and get into bed? Here is a nightgown for you 
to wear/ 

T have a nightgown/ Catherine said. 

Tt is better for you to wear this nightgown/ the w^oman 
said. 

I went outside and sat on a chair in the hallway. 

‘You can come in now/ the w’oman said from the 
doorway. Catherine was lying in the narrow bed wear- 
ing a plain, square-cut nightgown that looked as though 
it were made of rough sheeting. She smiled at me. 

T’m having fine pains now/ she said. The woman 
was holding her wrist and timing the pains with a watch. 

‘ That was a big one , ’ Catherine said . I saw it on her face . 

‘Where’s the doctor?’ I asked the woman. 

‘He’s lying down sleeping. He will be here when he is 
needed.’ 

‘I must do something for Madame, now/ the nurse 
said. ‘Would you please step out again?’ 

I went out into the hall. It was a bare hall with two 
windows and closed doors all down the corridor. It 
smelled of hospital. I sat on the chair and looked at 
the floor and prayed for Catherine. 

‘You can come in/ the nurse said. I went in. 

‘Hello, darling/ Catherine said. 

‘How is it?’ 

329 



A FAREWELL TO ARAIS 

'They are coming quite often now.’ Her face drew 
up. Then she smiled. 

'That was a real one. Do you w’ant to put your hand 
on my back again, nurse?’ 

Tf it helps you/ the nurse said. 

'You go away, darling/ Catherine said. 'Go out 
and get something to eat. I may do this for a long time 
the nurse says.’ 

'The first labour is usually protracted/ the nurse said. 

'Please go out and get something to eat/ Catherine 
said. 'I’m fine, really.’ 

'I’ll stay awhile,’ I said. 

The pains came quite regularly, then slackened off. 
Catherine was ver\’ excited. When the pains were bad 
she called them good ones. When they started to fall off 
she was disappointed and ashamed. 

'You go out, darling,’ she said. 'I think you are just 
making me self-conscious.’ Her face tied up. 'There. 
That was better. I so want to be a good wife and have 
this child without any foolishness. Please go and get 
some breakfast, darling, and then come back. I won’t 
miss you. Nurse is splendid to me.’ 

'You have plenty of time for breakfast,’ the nurse said. 

T’ll go then. Good-bye, sweet.’ 

'Good-bye,’ Catherine said, 'and have a fine breakfast 
for me too.’ 

'Where can I get breakfast?’ I asked the nurse. 

'There’s a cafe down the street at the square,’ she said. 
'It should be open now.’ 

Outside it was getting light. I walked down the empty 
street to the cafe. There was a light in the window. 
I went in and stood at the zinc bar and an old man served 
me a glass of white wine and a brioche. The brioche was 

330 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

Yesterday's. I dipped it in the wine and than drank a 
glass of coffee. 

'What do you do at this hour?' the old man asked. 

'My wife is in labour at the hospital,’ 

'So. I wish you good luck.’ 

'Give me another glass of wine.’ 

He poured it from the bottle slopping it over a little 
so some ran dowm on the zinc. I drank this glass, paid 
and went out. Outside along the street w^ere the refuse 
cans from the houses w^aiting for the collector. A dog 
w’as nosing at one of the cans. 

'What do you want?’ I asked and looked in the can 
to see if there w^as an}i;hing I could pull out for him; 
there w^as nothing on top but coffee-grounds, dust and 
some dead flow’ers. 

'There isn’t anjthing, dog,’ I said. The dog crossed 
the street. I w^ent up the stairs in the hospital to the 
floor Catherine w^as on and dowm the hall to her room. 
I knocked on the door. There was no answ^er. I opened 
the door; the room was empty, except for Catherine’s 
bag on a chair and her dressing-gown hanging on a 
hook on the w^all. I w^ent out and dowm the hall, looking 
for somebody. I found a nurse. 

'Where is Aladame Heniy?’ 

'A lady has just gone to the delivery room.’ 

'Where is it?’ 

T will show' you.’ 

She took me dowm to the end of the hall. The door 
of the room wns partly open. I could see Catherine 
lying on a table, covered by a sheet. The nurse was on 
one side and the doctor stood on the other side of the 
table beside some cylinders. The doctor held a rubber 
mask attached to a tube in one hand. 

33 ^ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T will give you a gown and you can go in/ the nurse 
said, ‘Come in here, please.’ 

She put a white gown on me and pinned it at the neck 
in back with a safety-pin. 

‘Now yon can go in/ she said. I went into the room. 

‘Hello 5 darling/ Catherine said in a strained voice. 
‘I’m not doing much.’ 

‘You are Mr. Henr^^?’ the doctor asked. 

‘Yes. How is everything going, doctor?’ 

‘Things are going very v/ell,’ the doctor said. ‘We 
came in here where it is easy to give gas for the pains.’ 

‘I want it now,’ Catherine said. The doctor placed 
the rubber mask over her face and turned a dial and I 
watched Catherine breathing deeply and rapidly. Then 
she pushed the mask aw^ay. The doctor shut off the 
petcock. 

‘That wasn’t a very big one. I had a very big one 
a while ago. The doctor made me go clear out, didn’t 
you, doctor?’ Her voice was strange. It rose on the 
word doctor. 

The doctor smiled. 

‘I want it again,’ Catherine said. She held the rubber 
tight to her face and breathed fast. I heard her moaning 
a little. Then she pulled the mask away and smiled. 

‘That was a big one,’ she said. ‘That was a very big 
one. Don’t you worry, darling. You go away. Go have 
another breakfast.’ 

‘FII stay,’ I said. 

We had gone to the hospital about three o’clock in 
the morning. At noon Catherine was still in the delivery 
room. The pains had slackened again. She looked 
very tired and worn now but she was still cheerful. 

332 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


T’m not any good, darling,’ she said. T’m so sorrj'. 
I thought I would do it very easily. Now -there’s 
one - ’ she reached out her hand for the mask and held 
it over her face. The doctor moved the dial and watched 
her. In a little wliile it was over. 

Tt wasn’t much,’ Catherine said. She smiled. T’m 
a fool about the gas. It’s wonderful.’ 

‘We’ll get some for the home,’ I said. 

‘There me comes ^ Catherine said quickly. The doctor 
turned the dial and looked at his watch. 

‘What is the interval now?’ I asked. 

‘About a minute.’ 

‘Don’t you want lunch?’ 

‘I will have something pretty soon,’ he said. 

‘You must have something to eat, doctor,’ Catherine 
said. ‘I’m so sorry I go on so long. Couldn’t my husband 
give me the gas?’ 

‘If you wish,’ the doctor said. ‘You turn it to the 
numeral two.’ 

‘I see,’ I said. There was a marker on a dial that turned 
with a handle. 

‘I want it now,' Catherine said. She held the mask 
tight to her face. I turned the dial to number two 
and when Catherine put down the mask I turned 
it off. It was very good of the doctor to let me do 
something. 

‘Did you do it, darling?’ Catherine asked. She stroked 
my wrist. 

‘Sure.’ 

‘You’re so lovely.’ She was a little drunk from the gas. 

T will eat from a tray in the ne.vt room,’ the doctor 
said. ‘You can call me any moment.’ While the time 
passed I watched him eat, then, after a while, I saw that 

333 



FAREWELL TO ARMS 


he was lying down and smoking a cigarette. Catherine 
was getting very tired. 

"Do you think I'll ever have this baby?’ she asked. 

"Yes, of course you will.’ 

T tr}’ as hard as I can. I push down but it goes away. 
There it comes. Give it to me.'" 

At two o'clock I went out and had lunch. There 
were a few men in the cafe sitting with coffee and glasses 
of kirsch or marc on the tables. I sat down at a table. 
"Can I eat?’ I asked the waiter. 

"It is past time for lunch.’ 

"Isn’t there anything for all hours?’ 

"You can have choucroiite.^ 

"Give me choucroiite and beer.’ 

"A demi or a bock?’ 

"A light demi.’ 

The waiter brought a dish of sauerkraut with a slice 
of ham over the top and a sausage buried in the hot 
wine-soaked cabbage. I ate it and drank the beer. I w^as 
very hungry. I w’atched the people at the tables in the 
cafe. At one table they were playing cards. Tw^o men 
at the table next me were talking and smoking. The 
cafe w^as full of smoke. The zinc bar, where I had 
breakfasted, had three people behind it now; the old 
man, a plump w’oman in a black dress who sat behind 
a counter and kept track of everything serv^ed to the 
tables, and a boy in an apron. I w^ondered how many 
children the woman had and w^hat it had been like. 

When I was through with the choucroute 1 went 
back to the hospital. The street w^as all clean nowu 
There were no refuse cans out. The day w^as cloudy 
but the sun w^as trying to come through. I rode upstairs 
in the elevator, stepped out and w’'ent down the hall 

334 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


to Catherine's room, where I had left my white gown. 
I put it on and pinned it in back at the neck. I looked 
in the glass and saw myself looking like a fake doctor 
with a beard. I went down the hall to the delivery^ 
room. The door was closed and I knocked. No one 
answered so I turned the handle and went in. The 
doctor sat by Catherine. The nurse was doing some- 
thing at the other end of the room. 

‘Here is your husband/ the doctor said. 

‘Oh, darling, I have the most wonderful doctor/ 
Catherine said in a very strange voice. ‘He's been telling 
me the most wonderful story and when the pain came 
too badly he put me all the way out. He's wonderful. 
You’re wonderful, doctor.’ 

‘You’re drunk/ I said. 

‘I know it,’ Catherine said. ‘But you shouldn’t say 
it.’ Then ^Give it to me. Give it to meJ She clutched 
hold of the mask and breathed short and deep, pantingly, 
making the respirator click. Then she gave a long sigh 
and the doctor reached with his left hand and lifted a^vay 
the mask. 

‘That was a very big one/ Catherine said. Her voice 
was very strange. T’m not going to die now, darling. 
I’m past where I was going to die. Aren’t you glad?’ 

‘Don’t you get in that place again.’ 

‘I won’t. Fm not afraid of it though. I won't die, 
darling.’ 

‘You will not do an}" such foolishness/ the doctor 
said. ‘You would not die and leave your husband.’ 

‘Oh, no. I won’t die. I wouldn’t die. It’s silly to 
die. There it comes. Give it to meJ 

After a while the doctor said, ‘You will go out, Air. 
Henry, for a few moments and Its ill make an examination/ 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘He %vants to see how I am doing,’ Catherine said. 
‘You can come back afterward, darling, can’t he, doctor?’ 

‘Yes,’ said the doctor. ‘I will send word when he can 
come back.’ 

I went out the door and down the hall to the room 
where Catherine was to be after the baby came. I sat 
in a chair there and looked at the room. I had the paper 
in my coat that I had bought when I went out for lunch 
and I read it. It was beginning to be dark outside and 
I turned the light on to read. After a while I stopped 
reading and turned off the light and watched it get 
dark outside. I wondered why the doctor did not send 
for me. Maybe it was better I was away. He probably 
wanted me aw^ay for a while. I looked at my watch. 
If he did not send for me in ten minutes I would go down 
anyway. 

Poor, poor dear Cat. And this was the price you 
paid for sleeping together. This was the end of the 
trap. This was what people got for loving each other. 
Thank God for gas, anyway. What must it have been 
like before there were ansesthetics? Once it started 
they were in the mUl-race. Catherine had a good time 
in the time of pregnancy. It wasn’t bad. She was 
hardly ever sick. She was not awfully uncomfortable 
until toward the last. So now they got her in the end. 
You never got away with anything. Get away hell! 
It would have been the same if we had been married 
fifty times. And what if she should die? She won’t 
die. People don’t die in childbirth nowada5rs. That 
was what all husbands thought. Yes, but what if she 
should die? She won’t die. She’s just having a bad 
time. The initial labour is usually protracted. She’s 
only having a bad time. Afterward w’e’d say what a 

336 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


bad time, and Catherine would say it wasn^t really so 
bad. But what if she should die? She can’t die. Yes, 
but what if she should die? She can’t, I tell you. Don’t 
be a fool. It’s just a bad time. It’s just nature giving 
her hell. It’s only the first labour, which is almost al- 
ways protracted. Yes, but what if she should die? 
She can’t die. Why would she die? What reason is 
there for her to die? There’s just a child that has to 
be bom, the by-product of good nights in Milan. It 
makes trouble and is born and then you look after it 
and get fond of it maybe. But wLat if she should die? 
She won’t die. But what if she should die? She won’t. 
She’s all right. But w^hat if she should die? She can’t 
die. But what if she should die? Hey, what about that? 
What if she should die? 

The doctor came into the room. 

‘How does it go, doctor?’ 

Tt doesn’t go,’ he said. 

‘WTiat do you mean?’ 

‘Just that. I made an examination - ’ He detailed 
the result of the examination. ‘Since then I’ve waited to 
see. But it doesn’t go.’ 

‘WTiat do you advise?’ 

‘There are two things. Either a high forceps delivery 
which can tear and be quite dangerous besides being 
possibly bad for the cluld, and a Caesarean.’ 

‘What is the danger of a Caesarean?’ What if she 
should die! 

Tt should be no greater than the danger of an ordinary 
deliveiyu’ 

‘Would you do it yourself?’ 

‘Yes. I would need possibly an hour to get things ready 
and to get the people I would need. Perhaps a little less.’ 

T 337 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'What do you think?’ 

T would advise a Caesarean operation. If it were my 
wife I would do a Caesarean.’ 

'What are the after effects?’ 

'There are none. There is only the scar.’ 

'What about infection?’ 

'The danger is not so great as in a high forceps de- 
livery.’ 

'What if you just went on and did nothing?’ 

'You ivould have to do something eventually. Mrs. 
Henry is already losing much of her strength. The 
sooner we operate now the safer.’ 

'Operate as soon as you can,’ I said. 

'I will go and give the instructions.’ 

I went into the delivery room. The nurse w’-as with 
Catherine who lay on the table, big under the sheet, 
looking very pale and tired. 

'Did you tell him he could do it?’ she asked. 

'Yes.’ 

‘Isn’t that grand. Now it will be all over in an hour. 
I’m almost done, darling. I’m going all to pieces. Please 
give me that. It doesn’t work. Oh, it doesn't work!' 

'Breathe deeply.’ 

‘I am. Oh, it doesn’t work any more. It doesn’t 
work!’ 

'Get another cylinder,’ I said to the nurse. 

‘That is a new cylinder.’ 

'I’m just a fool, darling,’ Catherine said. 'But it 
doesn’t work any more.’ She began to cry. 'Oh, I 
wanted so to have this baby and not make trouble, and 
now I’m all done and all gone to pieces and it doesn’t 
work. Oh, darling, it doesn’t work at all. I don’t care 
if I die if it will only stop. Oh, please, darling, please 

338 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


make it stop. There it comes. Oh Oh Oh!’ She breathed 
s'fbbirgly in the mask. Tt doesn’t work. It doesn’t 
work. It doesn’t w'ork. Don’t mind me, darling. Please 
don’t cry. Don’t mind me. I’m just gone all to pieces. 
You poor sweet. I love you so and I’ll be good again. 
I’ll be good this time. Can’t they give me something? If 
they could only give me something.’ 

T’ll make it work. I’ll turn it all the way.’ 

‘Give it to me now.’ 

I turned the dial all the way and as she breathed 
hard and deep her hand relaxed on the mask. I shut 
off the gas and lifted the mask. She came back from a 
long way away. 

'That was lovely, darling. Oh, you’re so good to me.’ 

‘You be brave, because I can’t do that all the time. It 
might kill you.’ 

‘I’m not brave any more, darling. I’m all broken. 
They’ve broken me. I know it now.’ 

‘Everybody is that way.’ 

‘But it’s awful. They just keep it up till they break 
you.’ 

‘In an hour it wall be over.’ 

‘Isn’t that lovely? Darling, I won’t die, will I?’ 

‘No. I promise you won’t.’ 

‘Because I don’t want to die and leave you, but I 
get so tired of it and I feel I’m going to die.’ 

‘Nonsense. Everybody feels that.’ 

‘Sometimes I know' I’m going to die.’ 

‘You w'on’t. You can’t.’ 

‘But w'hat if I should?’ 

‘I won’t let you.’ 

‘Give it to me quick. Give it to meT 

Then afterward, ‘I won’t die. I w'on’t let myself die.’ 

339 



A FAREWELL TO ARIMS 


'Of course you won’t/ 

'You’ll stay with me?’ 

'Not to watch it/ 

'No, just to be there/ 

'Sure, ril be there all the time/ 

'You’re so good to me. There, give it to me. Give me 
some more. Ifs not working F 

I turned the dial to three and then four. I wished 
the doctor would come back, I was afraid of the numbers 
above two. 

Finally a new doctor came in with tw^o nurses and 
they lifted Catherine on to a wheeled stretcher and we 
started down the hall. The stretcher went rapidly down 
the hall and into the elevator where everyone had to 
crowd against the wall to make room; then up, then 
an open door and out of the elevator and down the 
hall on rubber wheels to the operating room. I did 
not recognize the doctor with his cap and mask on. 
There was another doctor and more nurses. 

^They've got to give me somethings Catherine said. 
^They've got to give me something. Oh please, doctor, 
give me enough to do some good!’ 

^One of the doctors put a mask over her face and I 
looked through the door and saw the bright small amphi- 
theatre of the operating room. 

'You can go in the other door and sit up there,’ a 
nurse said to me. There were benches behind a rail 
that looked down on the white table and the lights. I 
looked at Catherine. The mask was over her face and 
she was quiet now. They wheeled the stretcher for- 
ward. I turned away and walked down the hall. Two 
nurses were hurrying toward the entrance to the gallery. 

340 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘It’s a C^arean,’ one said. ‘They’re going to do a 
Caesarean.’ 

The other one laughed, ‘We’re just in time. Aren’t 
we lucky?’ They went in the door that led to the gallery. 

Another nurse came along. She was huriy’ing too. 

‘You go right in there. Go right in,’ she said. 

‘I’m staying outside.’ 

She hurried in. I walked up and down the hail. I 
was afraid to go in. I looked out the window. It was 
dark but in the light from the window I could see it 
was raining. I went into a room at the far end of the hall 
and looked at the labels on bottles in a glass case. Then 
I came out and stood in the empty hall and watched the 
door of the operating room. 

A doctor came out followed by a nurse. He held 
something in his two hands that looked like a freshly 
skinned rabbit and hurried across the corridor wdth it 
and in through another door. I went down to the door 
he had gone into and found them in the room doing 
things to a new-born child. The doctor held him up for 
me to see. He held him by the heels and slapped him. 

‘Is he all right?’ 

‘He’s magnificent. He’ll weigh five kilos.’ 

I had no feeling for him. He did not seem to have 
anything to do with me. I felt no feeling of fatherhood. 

‘Aren’t you proud of your son?’ the nurse asked. 
They were w’ashing him and wrapping him in some- 
thing. I saw the little dark face and dark hand, but I 
did not see him move or hear him cry. The doctor was 
doing something to him again. He looked upset. 

‘Xo,’ I said. ‘He nearly lulled his mother.’ 

‘It isn’t the little darling’s fault. Didn’t you want a 
boy?’ 


341 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


'No/ I said. The doctor was busy with him. He 
held him up by the feet and slapped him. I did not 
wait to see it. I went out in the hall. I could go in now 
and see. I w'ent in the door and a little way down the 
gallery. The nurses who were sitting at the rail motioned 
for me to come where they were. I shook my head. 
I could see enough where I was. 

I thought Catherine was dead. She looked dead. 
Her face was grey, the part of it that I could see. Dowm 
below, under the light, the doctor was sewing up the 
great long, forcep-spread, thick-edged wound. Another 
doctor in a mask gave the ansesthetic. Two nurses in 
masks handed things. It looked like a drawing of the 
Inquisition. I knew as I watched I could have watched 
it all, but I was glad I hadn’t. I do not think I could 
have watched them cut, but I watched the wound 
closed into a high welted ridge with quick skilful- 
looking stitches like a cobbler’s and w^as glad. WTaen 
the wound was closed I went out into the hall and walked 
up and down again. After a while the doctor came out. 

‘How is she?’ 

‘She is all right. Did you watch?’ 

He looked tired. 

‘I saw you sew up. The incision looked very long.’ 

‘You thought so?’ 

‘Yes. Will that scar flatten out?’ 

‘Oh, yes.’ 

After a while they brought out the wheeled stretcher 
and took it very rapidly down the hallway to the ele- 
vator. I went along beside it. Catherine was moaning. 
Downstairs they put her in the bed in her room. I sat 
in a chair at the foot of the bed. There was a nurse 
in the room. I got up and stood by the bed. It was dark 

342 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


in the room. Catherine put out her hand, ‘Hello, darling,’ 
she said. Her voice was very weak and tired. 

‘Hello, you sweet.’ 

‘What sort of baby was it?’ 

‘Sh - don’t talk,’ the nurse said. 

‘A boy. He’s long and wide and dark.’ 

‘Is he all right?’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. ‘He’s fine.’ 

I saw the nurse look at me strangely. 

‘I’m aw’fully tired,’ Catherine said. ‘And I hurt like 
hell. Are you all right, darling?’ 

‘I’m fine. Don’t talk.’ 

‘You w'ere lovely to me. Oh darling, I hurt dreadfully. 
What does he look like?’ 

‘He looks like a skinned rabbit with a puckered-up 
old-man’s face.’ 

‘You must go out,’ the nurse said. ‘Madame Henry 
must not talk.’ 

‘I’ll be outside,’ I said. 

‘Go and get something to eat.’ 

‘No. I’ll be outside.’ I kissed Catherine. She W’as 
very grey and w'eak and tired. 

‘May I speak to you?’ I said to the nurse. She came 
out in the hall with me. I walked a little way down the 
hall. 

‘What’s the matter with the baby?’ I asked. 

‘Didn’t you know?’ 

‘No.’ 

‘He wasn’t alive.’ 

‘He w'as dead?’ 

‘They couldn’t start him breathing. The cord was 
caught around his neck or something.’ 

‘So he’s dead.’ 


343 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Yes. It’s such a shame. He was such a fine big boy, 
I thought you knew.’ 

'No/ I said. 'You better go back in with Aladame.’ 

I sat down on the chair in front of a table where 
there were nurses’ reports hung on clips at the side and 
looked out of the window. I could see nothing but 
the dark and the rain falling across the light from the 
window. So that was it. The baby was dead. That 
was why the doctor looked so tired. But w^hy had they 
acted the way they did in the room with him? They 
supposed he would come around and start breathing 
probably. I had no religion but I knew he ought to 
have been baptized. But wdiat if he never breathed at 
all. He hadn’t. He had never been alive. Except in 
Catherine. I’d felt him kick there often enough. But 
I hadn’t for a w’’eek. Maybe he ivas choked all the time. 
Poor little kid. I wished the hell I’d been choked like 
that. No I didn’t. Still there would not be all this dying 
to go through. Now Catherine would die. That was 
what you did. You died. You did not know what it 
was about. You never had time to learn. They threw 
you in and told you the rules and the first time they 
caught you off base they killed you. Or they killed 
you gratuitously like Aymo. Or gave you the syphilis 
like Rinaldi. But they killed you in the end. You could 
count on that. Stay around and they would kill you. 

Once in camp I put a log on top of the fire and it was 
full of ants. As it commenced to burn, the ants swarmed 
out and went first towards the centre wLere the fire 
was; then turned back and ran toward the end. When 
there were enough on the end they fell off into the fire. 
Some got out, their bodies burnt and flattened, and 
went off not knowing w^here they were going. But most 

344 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

of them went toward the fire and then back toward 
the end and swarmed on the cool end and finally fell 
off into the fire, I remember thinking at the time that 
it was the end of the world and a splendid chance to be 
a messiah and lift the log off the fire and throw" it out 
where the ants could get off onto the ground. But I 
did not do anything but throw a tin cup of water on 
the log, so that I would have the cup empty to put 
whisky in before I added w^ater to it. I think the cup 
of water on the burning log only steamed the ants. 

So now I sat out in the hall and waited to hear how 
Catherine was. The nurse did not come out, so after a 
wLile I w"ent to the door and opened it very softly and 
looked in. I could not see at first because there was a 
bright light in the hall and it was dark in the room. 
Then I saw the nurse sitting by the bed and Catherine’s 
head on a pillow, and she all flat under the sheet. The 
nurse put her finger to her lips, then stood up and came 
to the door. 

'How is she?’ I asked. 

'She’s all right/ the nurse said. 'You should go and 
have your supper and then come back if you wish/ 

I went down the hail and then dowm the stairs and 
out the door of the hospital and down the dark street 
in the rain to the cafe. It w'as brightly lighted inside 
and there were many people at the tables. I did not 
see a place to sit, and a waiter came up to me and took 
my wet coat and hat and showed me a place at a table 
across from an elderly man who w^as drinking beer and 
reading the evening paper. I sat down and asked the 
waiter what the plat du jour was. 

'Veal stew - but it is finished.’ 

'What can I have to eat?’ 

345 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

‘Ham and eggs, eggs with cheese, or choucroutej^ 

T had choucroiite this noon,’ I said. 

‘That’s true,’ he said. ‘That’s true. You ate chou- 
croiite this noon.’ He was a middle-aged man with a 
bald top to his head and his hair slicked over it. He 
had a kind face. 

‘What do you want? Ham and eggs or eggs with cheese?’ 

‘Ham and eggs,’ I said, ‘and beer.’ 

‘A demi-blonde?’ 

‘Yes,’ I said. 

‘I remembered,’ he said. ‘You took a demi-blonde 
this noon.’ 

I ate the ham and eggs and drank the beer. The ham 
and eggs were in a round dish -the ham underneath 
and the eggs on top. It was very hot and at the first 
mouthful I had to take a drink of beer to cool my mouth. 
I was hungry and I asked the \vaiter for another order. 
I drank several glasses of beer. I w^as not thinking at all 
but read the paper of the man opposite me. It was about 
the break through on the British front. When he realized 
I was reading the back of his paper he folded it over. I 
thought of asking the waiter for a paper, but I could not 
concentrate. It was hot in the cafe and the air was bad. 
Many of the people at the tables knew one another. There 
were several card games going on. The waiters were busy 
bringing drinks from the bar to the tables. Two men 
came in and could find no place to sit. They stood op- 
posite the table where I was. I ordered another beer. 
I was not ready to leave yet. It was too soon to go back 
to the hospital. I tried not to think and to be perfectly 
cakn. The men stood around but no one was leaving, 
so they went out. I drank another beer. There was 
quite a pile of saucers now on the table in front of me. 

346 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

The man opposite me had taken off his spectacles, put 
them away in a case, folded his paper and put it in his 
pocket and now sat holding his liqueur glass and looking 
out at the room. Suddenly I knew I had to get back. 
I called the waiter, paid the reckoning, got into my coat, 
put on my hat and started out the door. I walked through 
the rain up to the hospital. 

Upstairs I met the nurse coming down the hall. 

T just called you at the hotel,’ she said. Something 
dropped inside me, 

‘What is wrong?’ 

‘Mrs. Henryk has had a haemorrhage.’ 

‘Can I go in?’ 

‘No, not yet. The doctor is with her.’ 

Ts it dangerous?’ 

Tt is very dangerous.’ The nurse went into the room 
and shut the door. I sat outside in the hall. Everything 
was gone inside of me. I did not think. I could not 
think. I knew she was going to die and I prayed that 
she would not. Don’t let her die. Oh, God, please 
don’t let her die. I’ll do anything for you if you won’t 
let her die. Please, please, please, dear God, don’t let her 
die. Dear God, don’t let her die. Please, please, please 
don’t let her die. God, please make her not die. Ill do 
anything you say if you don’t let her die. You took the 
baby but don’t let her die - that was all right but don’t 
let her die. Please, please, dear God, don’t let her die. 

The nurse opened the door and motioned with her 
finger for me to come. I followed her into the room. 
Catherine did not look up when I came in. I went over 
to the side of the bed. The doctor was standing by the 
bed on the opposite side. Catherine looked at me and 
smiled. I bent down over the bed and started to cr}u 

347 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 

'Poor darling/ Catherine said very softly. She looked 
grey, 

'YouVe all right, Cat/ I said. 'You’re going to be 
all right.’ 

T’m going to die/ she said; then waited and said, T 
hate it.’ 

I took her hand. 

'Don’t touch me,’ she said. I let go of her hand. 
She smiled. 'Poor darling. You touch me all you 
want.’ 

'You’ll be all right, Cat. I know you’ll be all right.’ 

'I meant to write you a letter to have if an5rthing hap- 
pened, but I didn’t do it.’ 

'Do you want me to get a priest or anyone to come 
and see you?’ 

‘Just you,’ she said. Then a little later, ‘I’m not afraid. 
I just hate it.’ 

'You must not talk so much,’ the doctor said. 

'All right,’ Catherine said. 

'Do you want me to do anything, Cat? Can I get you 
anything?’ 

Catherine smiled, 'No.’ Then a little later, 'You 
won’t do our things with another girl, or say the same 
things, will you?’ 

‘Never.’ 

'I want you to have girls, though.’ 

‘I don’t want them.’ 

'You are talking too much,’ the doctor said. 'You 
cannot talk. Mr. Henry must go out. He can come back 
again later. You are not going to die. You must not be 
silly.’ 

'All right,’ Catherine said. T’ll come and stay with 
you nights,’ she said. It was very hard for her to talk. 

348 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


Tlease go out of the room/ the doctor said. Catherine 
winlced at me^ her face grey. T’ll be right outside/ I 

said. 

‘Don’t worry, darling/ Catherine said. T’m not a 
bit afraid. It’s just a dirty trick.’ 

‘You dear, brave sweet.’ 

I waited outside in the hall. I waited a long time. 
The nurse came to the door and came over to me. T’m 
afraid Mrs. Henry is very ill/ she said. T’m afraid for 
her.’ 

Ts she dead?’ 

‘No, but she is unconscious.’ 

It seems she had one haemorrhage after another. 
They couldn’t stop it. I went into the room and stayed 
with Catherine until she died. She was unconscious 
all the time, and it did not take her very long to die. 

Outside the room in the hall I spoke to the doctor. Ts 
there anything I can do to-night?’ 

‘No. There is nothing to do. Can I take you to your 
hotel?’ 

‘No, thank you. I am going to stay here a while.’ 

‘I know there is nothing to say. I cannot tell you 

‘No/ I said. ‘There’s nothing to say.’ 

‘Good night/ he said. ‘I cannot take you to your 
hotel?’ 

‘No, thank you.’ 

Tt was the only thing to do/ he said, ‘The operation 
proved 

‘I do not want to talk about it/ I said. 

T would like to take you to your hotel.’ 

‘No, thank you.’ 

He went down the hall. I went to the door of the room. 

349 



A FAREWELL TO ARMS 


‘You can’t come in now,’ one of the nurses said. 

‘Yes, I can,’ I said. 

‘You can’t come in yet.’ 

‘You get out,’ I said. ‘The other one too.’ 

But after I had got them out and shut the door and 
turned off the light it wasn’t any good. It was like saying 
good-bye to a statue. After a while I went out and left 
the hospital and walked back to the hotel in the rain. 


THE END 





 




  chapter 1


Everybody was drunk. The whole battery was drunk going along the road
in the dark. We were going to the Champagne. The lieutenant kept
riding his horse out into the fields and saying to him, “I’m drunk, I
tell you, mon vieux. Oh, I am so soused.” We went along the road all
night in the dark and the adjutant kept riding up alongside my
kitchen and saying, “You must put it out. It is dangerous. It will be
observed.” We were fifty kilometers from the front but the adjutant
worried about the fire in my kitchen. It was funny going along that
road. That was when I was a kitchen corporal.




  chapter 2


The first matador got the horn through his sword hand and the crowd
hooted him out. The second matador slipped and the bull caught him
through the belly and he hung on to the horn with one hand and held
the other tight against the place, and the bull rammed him wham
against the wall and the horn came out, and he lay in the sand, and
then got up like crazy drunk and tried to slug the men carrying him
away and yelled for his sword but he fainted. The kid came out and
had to kill five bulls because you can’t have more than three
matadors, and the last bull he was so tired he couldn’t get the sword
in. He couldn’t hardly lift his arm. He tried five times and the
crowd was quiet because it was a good bull and it looked like him or
the bull and then he finally made it. He sat down in the sand and
puked and they held a cape over him while the crowd hollered and
threw things down into the bull ring.




  chapter 3


Minarets stuck up in the rain out of Adrianople across the mud flats.
The carts were jammed for thirty miles along the Karagatch road.
Water buffalo and cattle were hauling carts through the mud. No end
and no beginning. Just carts loaded with everything they owned. The
old men and women, soaked through, walked along keeping the cattle
moving. The Maritza was running yellow almost up to the bridge. Carts
were jammed solid on the bridge with camels bobbing along through
them. Greek cavalry herded along the procession. Women and kids were
in the carts crouched with mattresses, mirrors, sewing machines,
bundles. There was a woman having a kid with a young girl holding a
blanket over her and crying. Scared sick looking at it. It rained all
through the evacuation.




  chapter 4


We were in a garden at Mons. Young Buckley came in with his patrol
from across the river. The first German I saw climbed up over the
garden wall. We waited till he got one leg over and then potted him.
He had so much equipment on and looked awfully surprised and fell
down into the garden. Then three more came over further down the
wall. We shot them. They all came just like that.




  chapter 5


It was a frightfully hot day. We’d jammed an absolutely perfect
barricade across the bridge. It was simply priceless. A big old
wrought iron grating from the front of a house. Too heavy to lift and
you could shoot through it and they would have to climb over it. It
was absolutely topping. They tried to get over it, and we potted them
from forty yards. They rushed it, and officers came out alone and
worked on it. It was an absolutely perfect obstacle. Their officers
were very fine. We were frightfully put out when we heard the flank
had gone, and we had to fall back.




  chapter 6


They shot the six cabinet ministers at half-past six in the morning
against the wall of a hospital. There were pools of water in the
courtyard. There were wet dead leaves on the paving of the courtyard.
It rained hard. All the shutters of the hospital were nailed shut.
One of the ministers was sick with typhoid. Two soldiers carried him
downstairs and out into the rain. They tried to hold him up against
the wall but he sat down in a puddle of water. The other five stood
very quietly against the wall. Finally the officer told the soldiers
it was no good trying to make him stand up. When they fired the first
volley he was sitting down in the water with his head on his knees.




  chapter 7


Nick sat against the wall of the church where they had dragged him to
be clear of machine gun fire in the street. Both legs stuck out
awkwardly. He had been hit in the spine. His face was sweaty and
dirty. The sun shone on his face. The day was very hot. Rinaldi, big
backed, his equipment sprawling, lay face downward against the wall.
Nick looked straight ahead brilliantly. The pink wall of the house
opposite had fallen out from the roof, and an iron bedstead hung
twisted toward the street. Two Austrian dead lay in the rubble in the
shade of the house. Up the street were other dead. Things were
getting forward in the town. It was going well. Stretcher bearers
would be along any time now. Nick turned his head carefully and
looked down at Rinaldi. “Senta Rinaldi. Senta. You and me we’ve made
a separate peace.” Rinaldi lay still in the sun breathing with
difficulty. “Not patriots.” Nick turned his head carefully away
smiling sweatily. Rinaldi was a disappointing audience.




  chapter 8


While the bombardment was knocking the trench to pieces at Fossalta,
he lay very flat and sweated and prayed oh jesus christ get me out of
here. Dear jesus please get me out. Christ please please please
christ. If you’ll only keep me from getting killed I’ll do anything
you say. I believe in you and I’ll tell everyone in the world that
you are the only thing that matters. Please please dear jesus. The
shelling moved further up the line. We went to work on the trench and
in the morning the sun came up and the day was hot and muggy and
cheerful and quiet. The next night back at Mestre he did not tell the
girl he went upstairs with at the Villa Rossa about Jesus. And he
never told anybody.




  chapter 9


At two o’clock in the morning two Hungarians got into a cigar store
at Fifteenth Street and Grand Avenue. Drevitts and Boyle drove up
from the Fifteenth Street police station in a Ford. The Hungarians
were backing their wagon out of an alley. Boyle shot one off the seat
of the wagon and one out of the wagon box. Drevetts got frightened
when he found they were both dead. Hell Jimmy, he said, you oughtn’t
to have done it. There’s liable to be a hell of a lot of trouble.

—They’re crooks ain’t they? said Boyle. They’re wops ain’t they? Who
the hell is going to make any trouble?

—That’s all right maybe this time, said Drevitts, but how did you
know they were wops when you bumped them?

Wops, said Boyle, I can tell wops a mile off.




  chapter 10


One hot evening in Milan they carried him up onto the roof and he
could look out over the top of the town. There were chimney swifts in
the sky. After a while it got dark and the searchlights came out. The
others went down and took the bottles with them. He and Ag could hear
them below on the balcony. Ag sat on the bed. She was cool and fresh
in the hot night.

Ag stayed on night duty for three months. They were glad to let her.
When they operated on him she prepared him for the operating table,
and they had a joke about friend or enema. He went under the
anæsthetic holding tight on to himself so that he would not blab
about anything during the silly, talky time. After he got on crutches
he used to take the temperature so Ag would not have to get up from
the bed. There were only a few patients, and they all knew about it.
They all liked Ag. As he walked back along the halls he thought of Ag
in his bed.

Before he went back to the front they went into the Duomo and prayed.
It was dim and quiet, and there were other people praying. They
wanted to get married, but there was not enough time for the banns,
and neither of them had birth certificates. They felt as though they
were married, but they wanted everyone to knew about it, and to make
it so they could not lose it.

Ag wrote him many letters that he never got until after the
armistice. Fifteen came in a bunch and he sorted them by the dates
and read them all straight through. They were about the hospital, and
how much she loved him and how it was impossible to get along without
him and how terrible it was missing him at night.

After the armistice they agreed he should go home to get a job so
they might be married. Ag would not come home until he had a good job
and could come to New York to meet her. It was understood he would
not drink, and he did not want to see his friends or anyone in the
States. Only to get a job and be married. On the train from Padova to
Milan they quarrelled about her not being willing to come home at
once. When they had to say good-bye in the station at Padova they
kissed good-bye, but were not finished with the quarrel. He felt sick
about saying good-bye like that.

He went to America on a boat from Genoa. Ag went back to Torre di
Mosta to open a hospital. It was lonely and rainy there, and there
was a battalion of _arditi_ quartered in the town. Living in the
muddy, rainy town in the winter the major of the battalion made love
to Ag, and she had never known Italians before, and finally wrote a
letter to the States that theirs had been only a boy and girl affair.
She was sorry, and she knew he would probably not be able to
understand, but might some day forgive her, and be grateful to her,
and she expected, absolutely unexpectedly, to be married in the
spring. She loved him as always, but she realized now it was only a
boy and girl love. She hoped he would have a great career, and
believed in him absolutely. She knew it was for the best.

The Major did not marry her in the spring, or any other time. Ag
never got an answer to her letter to Chicago about it. A short time
after he contracted gonorrhea from a sales girl from The Fair riding
in a taxicab through Lincoln Park.




  chapter 11


In 1919 he was travelling on the railroads in Italy carrying a square
of oilcloth from the headquarters of the party written in indelible
pencil and saying here was a comrade who had suffered very much under
the whites in Budapest and requesting comrades to aid him in any way.
He used this instead of a ticket. He was very shy and quite young and
the train men passed him on from one crew to another. He had no
money, and they fed him behind the counter in railway eating houses.

He was delighted with Italy. It was a beautiful country he said. The
people were all kind. He had been in many towns, walked much and seen
many pictures. Giotto, Masaccio, and Piero della Francesca he bought
reproductions of and carried them wrapped in a copy of _Avanti_.
Mantegna he did not like.

He reported at Bologna, and I took him with me up into the Romagna
where it was necessary I go to see a man. We had a good trip
together. It was early September and the country was pleasant. He was
a Magyar, a very nice boy and very shy. Horthy’s men had done some
bad things to him. He talked about it a little. In spite of Italy, he
believed altogether in the world revolution.

—But how is the movement going in Italy? he asked.

—Very badly, I said.

—But it will go better, he said. You have everything here. It is the
one country that everyone is sure of. It will be the starting point
of everything.

At Bologna he said good-bye to us to go on the train to Milano and
then to Aosta to walk over the pass into Switzerland. I spoke to him
about the Mantegnas in Milano. No, he said, very shyly, he did not
like Mantegna. I wrote out for him where to eat in Milano and the
addresses of comrades. He thanked me very much, but his mind was
already looking forward to walking over the pass. He was very eager
to walk over the pass while the weather held good. The last I heard
of him the Swiss had him in jail near Sion.




  chapter 12


They whack whacked the white horse on the legs and he knee-ed himself
up. The picador twisted the stirrups straight and pulled and hauled
up into the saddle. The horse’s entrails hung down in a blue bunch
and swung backward and forward as he began to canter, the _monos_
whacking him on the back of his legs with the rods. He cantered
jerkily along the barrera. He stopped stiff and one of the _monos_
held his bridle and walked him forward. The picador kicked in his
spurs, leaned forward and shook his lance at the bull. Blood pumped
regularly from between the horse’s front legs. He was nervously
wobbly. The bull could not make up his mind to charge.




  chapter 13


The crowd shouted all the time and threw pieces of bread down into
the ring, then cushions and leather wine bottles, keeping up
whistling and yelling. Finally the bull was too tired from so much
bad sticking and folded his knees and lay down and one of the
_cuadrilla_ leaned out over his neck and killed him with the
_puntillo_. The crowd came over the barrera and around the torero and
two men grabbed him and held him and some one cut off his pigtail and
was waving it and a kid grabbed it and ran away with it. Afterwards I
saw him at the café. He was very short with a brown face and quite
drunk and he said after all it has happened before like that. I am
not really a good bull fighter.




  chapter 14


If it happened right down close in front of you, you could see
Villalta snarl at the bull and curse him, and when the bull charged
he swung back firmly like an oak when the wind hits it, his legs
tight together, the muleta trailing and the sword following the curve
behind. Then he cursed the bull, flopped the muleta at him, and swung
back from the charge his feet firm, the muleta curving and each swing
the crowd roaring.

When he started to kill it was all in the same rush. The bull looking
at him straight in front, hating. He drew out the sword from the
folds of the muleta and sighted with the same movement and called to
the bull, Toro! Toro! and the bull charged and Villalta charged and
just for a moment they became one. Villalta became one with the bull
and then it was over. Villalta standing straight and the red kilt of
the sword sticking out dully between the bull’s shoulders. Villalta,
his hand up at the crowd and the bull roaring blood, looking straight
at Villalta and his legs caving.




  chapter 15


I heard the drums coming down the street and then the fifes and the
pipes and then they came around the corner, all dancing. The street
full of them. Maera saw him and then I saw him. When they stopped the
music for the crouch he hunched down in the street with them all and
when they started it again he jumped up and went dancing down the
street with them. He was drunk all right.

You go down after him, said Maera, he hates me.

So I went down and caught up with them and grabbed him while he was
crouched down waiting for the music to break loose and said, Come on
Luis. For Christ sake you’ve got bulls this afternoon. He didn’t
listen to me, he was listening so hard for the music to start.

I said, Don’t be a damn fool Luis. Come on back to the hotel.

Then the music started up again and he jumped up and twisted away
from me and started dancing. I grabbed his arm and he pulled loose
and said, Oh leave me alone. You’re not my father.

I went back to the hotel and Maera was on the balcony looking out to
see if I’d be bringing him back. He went inside when he saw me and
came downstairs disgusted.

Well, I said, after all he’s just an ignorant Mexican savage.

Yes, Maera said, and who will kill his bulls after he gets a
_cogida?_

We, I suppose, I said.

Yes, we, said Maera. We kills the savages’ bulls, and the drunkards’
bulls, and the _riau-riau_ dancers’ bulls. Yes. We kill them. We kill
them all right. Yes. Yes. Yes.




  chapter 16


Maera lay still, his head on his arms, his face in the sand. He felt
warm and sticky from the bleeding. Each time he felt the horn coming.
Sometimes the bull only bumped him with his head. Once the horn went
all the way through him and he felt it go into the sand. Someone had
the bull by the tail. They were swearing at him and flopping the cape
in his face. Then the bull was gone. Some men picked Maera up and
started to run with him toward the barriers through the gate out the
passage way around under the grand stand to the infirmary. They laid
Maera down on a cot and one of the men went out for the doctor. The
others stood around. The doctor came running from the corral where he
had been sewing up picador horses. He had to stop and wash his hands.
There was a great shouting going on in the grandstand overhead. Maera
wanted to say something and found he could not talk. Maera felt
everything getting larger and larger and then smaller and smaller.
Then it got larger and larger and larger and then smaller and
smaller. Then everything commenced to run faster and faster as when
they speed up a cinematograph film. Then he was dead.




  chapter 17


They hanged Sam Cardinella at six o’clock in the morning in the
corridor of the county jail. The corridor was high and narrow with
tiers of cells on either side. All the cells were occupied. The men
had been brought in for the hanging. Five men sentenced to be hanged
were in the five top cells. Three of the men to be hanged were
negroes. They were very frightened. One of the white men sat on his
cot with his head in his hands. The other lay flat on his cot with a
blanket wrapped around his head.

They came out onto the gallows through a door in the wall. There were
six or seven of them including two priests. They were carrying Sam
Cardinella. He had been like that since about four o’clock in the
morning.

While they were strapping his legs together two guards held him up
and the two priests were whispering to him. “Be a man, my son,” said
one priest. When they came toward him with the cap to go over his
head Sam Cardinella lost control of his sphincter muscle. The guards
who had been holding him up dropped him. They were both disgusted.
“How about a chair, Will?” asked one of the guards, “Better get one,”
said a man in a derby hat.

When they all stepped back on the scaffolding back of the drop, which
was very heavy, built of oak and steel and swung on ball bearings,
Sam Cardinella was left sitting there strapped tight, the younger of
the two priests kneeling beside the chair. The priest skipped back
onto the scaffolding just before the drop fell.




  chapter 18


The king was working in the garden. He seemed very glad to see me. We
walked through the garden. This is the queen, he said. She was
clipping a rose bush. Oh how do you do, she said. We sat down at a
table under a big tree and the king ordered whiskey and soda. We have
good whiskey anyway, he said. The revolutionary committee, he told
me, would not allow him to go outside the palace grounds. Plastiras
is a very good man I believe, he said, but frightfully difficult. I
think he did right though shooting those chaps. If Kerensky had shot
a few men things might have been altogether different. Of course the
great thing in this sort of an affair is not to be shot oneself!

It was very jolly. We talked for a long time. Like all Greeks he
wanted to go to America.





UP IN MICHIGAN


UP IN MICHIGAN


Jim Gilmore came to Hortons Bay from Canada. He bought the blacksmith
shop from old man Horton. Jim was short and dark with big mustaches
and big hands. He was a good horseshoer and did not look much like a
blacksmith even with his leather apron on. He lived upstairs above
the blacksmith shop and took his meals at A. J. Smith’s.

Liz Coates worked for Smith’s. Mrs. Smith, who was a very large clean
woman, said Liz Coates was the neatest girl she’d ever seen. Liz had
good legs and always wore clean gingham aprons and Jim noticed that
her hair was always neat behind. He liked her face because it was so
jolly but he never thought about her.

Liz liked Jim very much. She liked it the way he walked over from the
shop and often went to the kitchen door to watch for him to start
down the road. She liked it about his mustache. She liked it about
how white his teeth were when he smiled. She liked it very much that
he didn’t look like a blacksmith. She liked it how much A. J. Smith
and Mrs. Smith liked Jim. One day she found that she liked it the way
the hair was black on his arms and how white they were above the
tanned line when he washed up in the washbasin outside the house.
Liking that made her feel funny.

Hortons Bay, the town, was only five houses on the main road between
Boyne City and Charlevoix. There was the general store and postoffice
with a high false front and maybe a wagon hitched out in front,
Smith’s house, Stroud’s house, Fox’s house, Horton’s house and Van
Hoosen’s house. The houses were in a big grove of elm trees and the
road was very sandy. There was farming country and timber each way up
the road. Up the road a ways was the Methodist church and down the
road the other direction was the township school. The blacksmith shop
was painted red and faced the school.

A steep sandy road ran down the hill to the bay through the timber.
From Smith’s back door you could look out across the woods that ran
down to the lake and across the bay. It was very beautiful in the
spring and summer, the bay blue and bright and usually whitecaps on
the lake out beyond the point from the breeze blowing from Charlevoix
and Lake Michigan. From Smith’s back door Liz could see ore barges
way out in the lake going toward Boyne City. When she looked at them
they didn’t seem to be moving at all but if she went in and dried
some more dishes and then came out again they would be out of sight
beyond the point.

All the time now Liz was thinking about Jim Gilmore. He didn’t seem
to notice her much. He talked about the shop to A. J. Smith and about
the Republican Party and about James G. Blaine. In the evenings he
read the Toledo Blade and the Grand Rapids paper by the lamp in the
front room or went out spearing fish in the bay with a jacklight with
A. J. Smith. In the fall he and Smith and Charley Wyman took a wagon
and tent, grub, axes, their rifles and two dogs and went on a trip to
the pine plains beyond Vanderbilt deer hunting. Liz and Mrs. Smith
were cooking for four days for them before they started. Liz wanted
to make something special for Jim to take but she didn’t finally
because she was afraid to ask Mrs. Smith for the eggs and flour and
afraid if she bought them Mrs. Smith would catch her cooking. It
would have been all right with Mrs. Smith but Liz was afraid.

All the time Jim was gone on the deer hunting trip Liz thought about
him. It was awful while he was gone. She couldn’t sleep well from
thinking about him but she discovered it was fun to think about him
too. If she let herself go it was better. The night before they were
to come back she didn’t sleep at all, that is she didn’t think she
slept because it was all mixed up in a dream about not sleeping and
really not sleeping. When she saw the wagon coming down the road she
felt weak and sick sort of inside. She couldn’t wait till she saw Jim
and it seemed as though everything would be all right when he came.
The wagon stopped outside under the big elm and Mrs. Smith and Liz
went out. All the men had beards and there were three deer in the
back of the wagon, their thin legs sticking stiff over the edge of
the wagon box. Mrs. Smith kissed Alonzo and he hugged her. Jim said
“Hello Liz.” and grinned. Liz hadn’t known just what would happen
when Jim got back but she was sure it would be something. Nothing had
happened. The men were just home that was all. Jim pulled the burlap
sacks off the deer and Liz looked at them. One was a big buck. It was
stiff and hard to lift out of the wagon.

“Did you shoot it Jim?” Liz asked.

“Yeah. Aint it a beauty?” Jim got it onto his back to carry to the
smokehouse.

That night Charley Wyman stayed to supper at Smith’s. It was too late
to get back to Charlevoix. The men washed up and waited in the front
room for supper.

“Aint there something left in that crock Jimmy?” A. J. Smith asked
and Jim went out to the wagon in the barn and fetched in the jug of
whiskey the men had taken hunting with them. It was a four gallon jug
and there was quite a little slopped back and forth in the bottom.
Jim took a long pull on his way back to the house. It was hard to
lift such a big jug up to drink out of it. Some of the whiskey ran
down on his shirt front. The two men smiled when Jim came in with the
jug. A. J. Smith sent for glasses and Liz brought them. A. J. poured
out three big shots.

“Well here’s looking at you A. J.” said Charley Wyman.

“That damn big buck Jimmy.” said A. J.

“Here’s all the ones we missed A. J.” said Jim and downed his liquor.

“Tastes good to a man.”

“Nothing like it this time of year for what ails you.”

“How about another boys?”

“Here’s how A. J.”

“Down the creek boys.”

“Here’s to next year.”

Jim began to feel great. He loved the taste and the feel of whisky.
He was glad to be back to a comfortable bed and warm food and the
shop. He had another drink. The men came in to supper feeling
hilarious but acting very respectable. Liz sat at the table after she
put on the food and ate with the family. It was a good dinner. The
men ate seriously. After supper they went into the front room again
and Liz cleaned off with Mrs. Smith. Then Mrs. Smith went up stairs
and pretty soon Smith came out and went up stairs too. Jim and
Charley were still in the front room. Liz was sitting in the kitchen
next to the stove pretending to read a book and thinking about Jim.
She didn’t want to go to bed yet because she knew Jim would be coming
out and she wanted to see him as he went out so she could take the
way he looked up to bed with her.

She was thinking about him hard and then Jim came out. His eyes were
shining and his hair was a little rumpled. Liz looked down at her
book. Jim came over back of her chair and stood there and she could
feel him breathing and then he put his arms around her. Her breasts
felt plump and firm and the nipples were erect under his hands. Liz
was terribly frightened, no one had ever touched her, but she
thought, “He’s come to me finally. He’s really come.”

She held herself stiff because she was so frightened and did not know
anything else to do and then Jim held her tight against the chair and
kissed her. It was such a sharp, aching, hurting feeling that she
thought she couldn’t stand it. She felt Jim right through the back of
the chair and she couldn’t stand it and then something clicked inside
of her and the feeling was warmer and softer. Jim held her tight hard
against the chair and she wanted it now and Jim whispered, “Come on
for a walk.”

Liz took her coat off the peg on the kitchen wall and they went out
the door. Jim had his arm around her and every little way they
stopped and pressed against each other and Jim kissed her. There was
no moon and they walked ankle deep in the sandy road through the
trees down to the dock and the warehouse on the bay. The water was
lapping in the piles and the point was dark across the bay. It was
cold but Liz was hot all over from being with Jim. They sat down in
the shelter of the warehouse and Jim pulled Liz close to him. She was
frightened. One of Jim’s hands went inside her dress and stroked over
her breast and the other hand was in her lap. She was very frightened
and didn’t know how he was going to go about things but she snuggled
close to him. Then the hand that felt so big in her lap went away and
was on her leg and started to move up it.

“Don’t Jim”. Liz said. Jim slid the hand further up.

“You musn’t Jim. You musn’t”. Neither Jim nor Jim’s big hand paid any
attention to her.

The boards were hard. Jim had her dress up and was trying to do
something to her. She was frightened but she wanted it. She had to
have it but it frightened her.

“You musn’t do it Jim. You musn’t.”

“I got to. I’m going to. You know we got to.”

“No we haven’t Jim. We aint got to. Oh it isn’t right. Oh it’s so big
and it hurts so. You can’t. Oh Jim. Jim. Oh.”

The hemlock planks of the dock were hard and splintery and cold and
Jim was heavy on her and he had hurt her. Liz pushed him, she was so
uncomfortable and cramped. Jim was asleep. He wouldn’t move. She
worked out from under him and sat up and straightened her skirt and
coat and tried to do something with her hair. Jim was sleeping with
his mouth a little open. Liz leaned over and kissed him on the cheek.
He was still asleep. She lifted his head a little and shook it. He
rolled his head over and swallowed. Liz started to cry. She walked
over to the edge of the dock and looked down to the water. There was
a mist coming up from the bay. She was cold and miserable and
everything felt gone. She walked back to where Jim was lying and
shook him once more to make sure. She was crying.

“Jim” she said, “Jim. Please Jim”.

Jim stirred and curled a little tighter. Liz took off her coat and
leaned over and covered him with it. She tucked it around him neatly
and carefully. Then she walked across the dock and up the steep sandy
road to go to bed. A cold mist was coming up through the woods from
the bay.




OUT OF SEASON


OUT OF SEASON


On the four lira he had earned by spading the hotel garden he got
quite drunk. He saw the young gentleman coming down the path and
spoke to him mysteriously. The young gentleman said he had not eaten
yet but would be ready to go as soon as lunch was finished. Forty
minutes or an hour.

At the cantina near the bridge they trusted him for three more
grappas because he was so confident and mysterious about his job for
the afternoon. It was a windy day with the sun coming out from behind
clouds and then going under in sprinkles of rain. A wonderful day for
trout fishing.

The young gentleman came out of the hotel and asked him about the
rods. Should his wife come behind with the rods? Yes, said Peduzzi,
let her follow us. The young gentleman went back into the hotel and
spoke to his wife. He and Peduzzi started down the road. The young
gentleman had a musette over his shoulder. Peduzzi saw the wife, who
looked as young as the young gentleman and was wearing mountain boots
and a blue beret, start out to follow them down the road carrying the
fishing rods unjointed one in each hand. Peduzzi didn’t like her to
be way back there. Signorina, he called, winking at the young
gentleman, come up here and walk with us. Signora come up here. Let
us all walk together. Peduzzi wanted them all three to walk down the
street of Cortina together.

The wife stayed behind, following rather sullenly. Signorina, Peduzzi
called tenderly, come up here with us. The young gentleman looked
back and shouted something. The wife stopped lagging behind, and
walked up.

Everyone they met walking through the main street of the town Peduzzi
greeted elaborately. _Buon’ di Arturo!_ Tipping his hat. The bank
clerk stared at him from the door of the Fascist café. Groups of
three and four people standing in front of the shops stared at the
three. The workmen in their stone-powdered jackets working on the
foundations of the new hotel looked up as they passed. Nobody spoke
or gave any sign to them except the town beggar, lean and old with a
spittle thickened beard, who lifted his hat as they passed.

Peduzzi stopped in front of a store with the window full of bottles
and brought his empty grappa bottle from an inside pocket of his old
military coat. A little to drink, some marsala for the Signora,
something, something to drink. He gestured with the bottle. It was a
wonderful day. Marsala, you like marsala, Signorina? A little
marsala?

The wife stood sullenly. You’ll have to play up to this, she said. I
can’t understand a word he says. He’s drunk isn’t he?

The young gentleman appeared not to hear Peduzzi. He was thinking
what in hell makes him say Marsala. That’s what Max Beerbohm drinks.

_Geld,_ Peduzzi said finally, taking hold of the young gentleman’s
sleeve. _Lire._ He smiled reluctant to press the subject but needing
to bring the young gentleman into action.

The young gentleman took out his pocket book and gave him a ten lire
note. Peduzzi went up the steps to the door of the Speciality of
Domestic and Foreign Wines shop. It was locked.

It is closed until two, someone passing in the street said
scornfully. Peduzzi came down the steps. He felt hurt. Never mind, he
said, we can get it at the Concordia.

They walked down the road to the Concordia three abreast. On the
porch of the Concordia where the rusty bobsleds were stacked the
young gentleman said, _Was wollen sie?_ Peduzzi handed him the ten
lira note folded over and over. Nothing, he said, Anything. He was
embarrassed. Marsala maybe. I don’t know. Marsala?

The door of the Concordia shut on the young gentleman and the wife.
Three marsalas, said the y. g. to the girl behind the pastry counter.
Two you mean? she asked. No, he said, one for a _vecchio._ Oh, she
said, a _vecchio,_ and laughed getting down the bottle. She poured
out the three muddy looking drinks into three glasses. The wife was
sitting at a table under the line of newspapers on sticks. The y. g.
put one of the marsalas in front of her. You might as well drink it,
he said. Maybe it’ll make you feel better. She sat and looked at the
glass. The y. g. went outside the door with a glass for Peduzzi but
could not see him.

I don’t know where he is, he said coming back into the pastry room
carrying the glass.

He wanted a quart of it, said the wife.

How much is a quarter litre, the y. g. asked the girl.

Of the bianco? One lira.

No, of the marsala. Put these two in too, he said giving her his own
glass and the one poured for Peduzzi. She filled the quarter litre
wine measure with a funnel. A bottle to carry it, said the y. g.

She went to hunt for a bottle. It all amused her.

I’m sorry you feel so rotten Tiny, he said, I’m sorry I talked the
way I did at lunch. We were both getting at the same thing from
different angles.

It doesn’t make any difference, she said. None of it makes any
difference.

Are you too cold, he asked. I wish you’d worn another sweater.

I’ve got on three sweaters.

The girl came in with a very slim brown bottle and poured the marsala
into it. The y. g. paid five lira more. They went out of the door.
The girl was amused. Peduzzi was walking up and down at the other end
out of the wind and holding the rods.

Come on, he said, I will carry the rods. What difference does it make
if anybody sees them. No one will trouble us. No one will make any
trouble for me in Cortina. I know them at the _municipio._ I have
been a soldier. Everybody in this town likes me. I sell frogs. What
if it is forbidden to fish? Not a thing. Nothing. No trouble. Big
trout I tell you. Lots of them.

They were walking down the hill toward the river. The town was in
back of them. The sun had gone under and it was sprinkling rain.
There, said Peduzzi, pointing to a girl in the doorway of a house
they passed. My daughter.

His doctor, the wife said, has he got to show us his doctor?

He said his daughter, said the y. g.

The girl went into the house as Peduzzi pointed.

They walked down the hill across the fields and then turned to follow
the river bank. Peduzzi talked rapidly with much winking and
knowingness. As they walked three abreast the wife caught his breath
across the wind. Once he nudged her in the ribs. Part of the time he
talked in D’Ampezzo dialect and sometimes in Tyroler German dialect.
He could not make out which the young gentleman and his wife
understood the best so he was being bi-lingual. But as the young
gentleman said _Ja Ja_ Peduzzi decided to talk altogether in Tyroler.
The young gentleman and the wife understood nothing.

Everybody in the town saw us going through with these rods. We’re
probably being followed by the game police now. I wish we weren’t in
on this damn thing. This damned old fool is so drunk too.

Of course you haven’t got the guts to just go back, said the wife. Of
course you have to go on.

Why don’t you go back? Go on back Tiny.

I’m going to stay with you. If you go to jail we might as well both
go.

They turned sharp down the bank and Peduzzi stood his coat blowing in
the wind gesturing at the river. It was brown and muddy. Off on the
right there was a dump heap.

Say it to me in Italian, said the young gentleman

_Un’ mezz’ ora. Piu d’ un’ mezz’ ora._

He says it’s at least a half an hour more. Go on back Tiny. You’re
cold in this wind anyway. It’s a rotten day and we aren’t going to
have any fun anyway.

All right, she said, and climbed up the grassy bank.

Peduzzi was down at the river and did not notice her till she was
almost out of sight over the crest. Frau! he shouted. Frau! Fraulein!
You’re not going? She went on over the crest of the hill.

She’s gone! said Peduzzi. It shocked him.

He took off the rubber bands that held the rod segments together and
commenced to joint up one of the rods.

But you said it was half an hour further.

Oh yes. It is good half an hour down. It is good here too.

Really?

Of course. It is good here and good there too.

The y. g. sat down on the bank and jointed up a rod, put on the reel
and threaded the line through the guides. He felt uncomfortable and
afraid that any minute a gamekeeper or a posse of citizens would come
over the bank from the town. He could see the houses of the town and
the campanile over the edge of the hill. He opened his leader box.
Peduzzi leaned over and dug his flat hard thumb and forefinger in and
tangled the moistened leaders.

Have you some lead?

No.

You must have some lead. Peduzzi was excited. You must have _piombo.
Piombo._ A little _piombo._ Just here. Just above the hook or your
bait will float on the water. You must have it. Just a little
_piombo._

Have you got some?

No. He looked through all his pockets desperately. Sifting through
the cloth dirt in the linings of his inside military pockets. I
haven’t any. We must have _piombo._

We can’t fish then, said the y. g. and unjointed the rod, reeling the
line back through the guides. We’ll get some _piombo_ and fish
tomorrow.

But listen _caro,_ you must have _piombo._ The line will lie flat on
the water. Peduzzi’s day was going to pieces before his eyes. You
must have _piombo._ A little is enough. Your stuff is all clean and
new but you have no lead. I would have brought some. You said you had
everything.

The y. g. looked at the stream discoloured by the melting snow. I
know, he said, we’ll get some _piombo_ and fish tomorrow.

At what hour in the morning? Tell me that.

At seven.

The sun came out. It was warm and pleasant. The young gentleman felt
relieved. He was no longer breaking the law. Sitting on the bank he
took the bottle of marsala out of his pocket and passed it to
Peduzzi. Peduzzi passed it back. The y. g. took a drink of it and
passed it to Peduzzi again. Peduzzi passed it back again. Drink, he
said, drink. It’s your marsala. After another short drink the y. g.
handed the bottle over. Peduzzi had been watching it closely. He took
the bottle very hurriedly and tipped it up. The grey hairs in the
folds of his neck oscillated as he drank his eyes fixed on the end of
the narrow brown bottle. He drank it all. The sun shone while he
drank. It was wonderful. This was a great day after all. A wonderful
day.

_Senta caro!_ In the morning at seven. He had called the young
gentleman _caro_ several times and nothing had happened. It was good
marsala. His eyes glistened. Days like this stretched out ahead. It
would begin again at seven in the morning.

They started to walk up the hill toward the town. The y. g. went on
ahead. He was quite a way up the hill. Peduzzi called to him.

Listen _caro_ can you let me take five lira for a favour?

For today? asked the young gentleman frowning.

No, not today. Give it to me today for tomorrow. I will provide
everything for tomorrow. _Pane, salami, formaggio,_ good stuff for
all of us. You and I and the signora. Bait for fishing, minnows, not
worms only. Perhaps I can get some marsala. All for five lira. Five
lira for a favour.

The young gentleman looked through his pocket book and took out a two
lira note and two ones.

Thank you _caro_. Thank you, said Peduzzi in the tone of one member
of the Carleton Club accepting the Morning Post from another. This
was living. He was through with the hotel garden, breaking up frozen
manure with a dung fork. Life was opening out.

Until seven o’clock then _caro,_ he said, slapping the y. g. on the
back. Promptly at seven.

I may not be going, said the young gentleman putting his purse back
in his pocket.

What, said Peduzzi. I will have minnows Signor. _Salami,_ everything.
You and I and the Signora. The three of us.

I may not be going, said the y. g., very probably not. I will leave
word with the padrone at the hotel office.




MY OLD MAN


MY OLD MAN


I guess looking at it now my old man was cut out for a fat guy, one
of those regular little roly fat guys you see around, but he sure
never got that way, except a little toward the last, and then it
wasn’t his fault, he was riding over the jumps only and he could
afford to carry plenty of weight then. I remember the way he’d pull
on a rubber shirt over a couple of jerseys and a big sweat shirt over
that and get me to run with him in the forenoon in the hot sun. He’d
have maybe taken a trial trip with one of Razzo’s skins early in the
morning after just getting in from Torino at four o’clock in the
morning and beating it out to the stables in a cab and then with the
dew all over everything and the sun just starting to get going I’d
help him pull off his boots and he’d get into a pair of sneakers and
all these sweaters and we’d start out.

“Come on kid” he’d say, stepping up and down on his toes in front of
the jock’s dressing room, “let’s get moving”.

Then we’d start off jogging around the infield once maybe with him
ahead running nice and then turn out the gate and along one of those
roads with all the trees along both sides of them that run out from
San Siro. I’d go ahead of him when we hit the road and I could run
pretty stout and I’d look around and he’d be jogging easy just behind
me and after a little while I’d look around again and he’d begun to
sweat. Sweating heavy and he’d just be dogging it along with his eyes
on my back, but when he’d catch me looking at him he’d grin and say,
“Sweating plenty?” When my old man grinned nobody could help but grin
too. We’d keep right on running out toward the mountains and then my
old man would yell “Hey Joe!” and I’d look back and he’d be sitting
under a tree with a towel he’d had around his waist wrapped around
his neck.

I’d come back and sit down beside him and he’d pull a rope out of his
pocket and start skipping rope out in the sun with the sweat pouring
off his face and him skipping rope out in the white dust with the
rope going cloppetty cloppety clop clop clop and the sun hotter and
him working harder up and down a patch of the road. Say it was a
treat to see my old man skip rope too. He could whirr it fast or lop
it slow and fancy. Say you ought to have seen wops look at us
sometimes when they’d come by going into town walking along with big
white steers hauling the cart. They sure looked as though they
thought the old man was nuts. He’d start the rope whirring till
they’d stop dead still and watch him, then give the steers a cluck
and a poke with the goad and get going again.

When I’d sit watching him working out in the hot sun I sure felt fond
of him. He sure was fun and he done his work so hard and he’d finish
up with a regular whirring that’d drive the sweat out on his face
like water and then sling the rope at the tree and come over and sit
down with me and lean back against the tree with the towel and a
sweater wrapped around his neck.

“Sure is hell keeping it down, Joe” he’d say and lean back and shut
his eyes and breath long and deep, “it aint like when you’re a kid”.
Then he’d get up before he started to cool and we’d jog along back to
the stables. That’s the way it was keeping down to weight. He was
worried all the time. Most jocks can just about ride off all they
want to. A jock loses about a kilo every time he rides, but my old
man was sort of dried out and he couldn’t keep down his kilos without
all that running.

I remember once at San Siro, Regoli, a little wop that was riding for
Buzoni came out across the paddock going to the bar for something
cool and flicking his boots with his whip, after he’d just weighed in
and my old man had just weighed in too and came out with the saddle
under his arm looking red faced and tired and too big for his silks
and he stood there looking at young Regoli standing up to the
outdoors bar cool and kid looking and I says, “What’s the matter
Dad?” cause I thought maybe Regoli had bumped him or something and he
just looked at Regoli and said, “Oh to hell with it” and went on to
the dressing room.

Well it would have been all right maybe if we’d stayed in Milan and
ridden at Milan and Torino cause if there ever were any easy courses
its those two. “Pianola, Joe”. My old man said when he dismounted in
the winning stall after what the wops thought was a hell of a
steeplechase. I asked him once, “This course rides its-self. It’s the
pace you’re going at that makes riding the jumps dangerous Joe. We
aint going any pace here, and they aint any really bad jumps either.
But it’s the pace always—not the jumps that makes the trouble”.

San Siro was the swellest course I’d ever seen but the old man said
it was a dog’s life. Going back and forth between Mirafiore and San
Siro and riding just about every day in the week with a train ride
every other night.

I was nuts about the horses too. There’s something about it when they
come out and go up the track to the post. Sort of dancy and tight
looking with the jock keeping a tight hold on them and maybe easing
off a little and letting them run a little going up. Then once they
were at the barrier it got me worse than anything. Especially at San
Siro with that big green infield and the mountains way off and the
fat wop starter with his big whip and the jocks fiddling them around
and then the barrier snapping up and that bell going off and them all
getting off in a bunch and then commencing to string out. You know
the way a bunch of skins gets off. If you’re up in the stand with a
pair of glasses all you see is them plunging off and then that bell
goes off and it seems like it rings for a thousand years and then
they come sweeping round the turn. There wasn’t ever anything like it
for me.

But my old man said one day in the dressing room when he was getting
into his street clothes, “None of these things are horses Joe. They’d
kill that bunch of skates for their hides and hoofs up at Paris”.
That was the day he’d won the Premio Commercio with Lantorna shooting
her out of the field the last hundred meters like pulling a cork out
of a bottle.

It was right after the Premio Commercio that we pulled out and left
Italy. My old man and Holbrook and a fat wop in a straw hat that kept
wiping his face with a handkerchief were having an argument at a
table in the Galleria. They were all talking French and the two of
them were after my old man about something. Finally he didn’t say
anything any more but just sat there and looked at Holbrook and the
two of them kept after him, first one talking and then the other and
the fat wop always butting in on Holbrook.

“You go out and buy me a Sportsman, will you Joe?” my old man said
and handed me a couple of _soldi_ without looking away from Holbrook.

So I went out of the Galleria and walked over to in front of the
Scala and bought a paper and came back and stood a little way away
because I didn’t want to butt in and my old man was sitting back in
his chair looking down at his coffee and fooling with a spoon and
Holbrook and the big wop were standing and the big wop was wiping his
face and shaking his head. And I came up and my old man acted just as
though the two of them weren’t standing there and said, “Want an ice
Joe?” Holbrook looked down at my old man and said slow and careful,
“You son of a bitch” and he and the fat wop went out through the
tables.

My old man sat there and sort of smiled at me but his face was white
and he looked sick as hell and I was scared and felt sick inside
because I knew something had happened and I didn’t see how anybody
could call my old man a son of a bitch and get away with it. My old
man opened up the Sportsman and studied the handicaps for a while and
then he said, “You got to take a lot of things in this world Joe”.
And three days later we left Milan for good on the Turin train for
Paris after an auction sale out in front of Turner’s stables of
everything we couldn’t get into a trunk and a suit case.

We got into Paris early in the morning in a long dirty station the
old man told me was the Gare de Lyon. Paris was an awful big town
after Milan. Seems like in Milan everybody is going somewhere and all
the trams run somewhere and there aint any sort of a mixup, but Paris
is all balled up and they never do straighten it out. I got to like
it though, part of it anyway, and say it’s got the best race courses
in the world. Seems as though that were the thing that keeps it all
going and about the only thing you can figure on is that every day
the buses will be going out to whatever track they’re running at
going right out through everything to the track. I never really got
to know Paris well because I just came in about once or twice a week
with the old man from Maisons and he always sat at the Cafe de la
Paix on the Opera side with the rest of the gang from Maisons and I
guess that’s one of the busiest parts of the town. But say it is
funny that a big town like Paris wouldn’t have a Galleria isn’t it?

Well, we went out to live at Maisons-Lafitte, where just about
everybody lives except the gang at Chantilly, with a Mrs. Meyers that
runs a boarding house. Maisons is about the swellest place to live
I’ve ever seen in all my life. The town aint so much, but there’s a
lake and a swell forest that we used to go off bumming in all day, a
couple of us kids, and my old man made me a sling shot and we got a
lot of things with it but the best one was a magpie. Young Dick
Atkinson shot a rabbit with it one day and we put it under a tree and
were all sitting around and Dick had some cigarettes and all of a
sudden the rabbit jumped up and beat it into the brush and we chased
it but we couldn’t find it. Gee we had fun at Maisons. Mrs. Meyers
used to give me lunch in the morning and I’d be gone all day. I
learned to talk French quick. It’s an easy language.

As soon as we got to Maisons my old man wrote to Milan for his
license and he was pretty worried till it came. He used to sit around
the Cafe de Paris in Maisons with the gang there, there were lots of
guys he’d known when he rode up at Paris before the war lived at
Maisons, and there’s a lot of time to sit around because the work
around a racing stable for the jocks that is, is all cleaned up by
nine o’clock in the morning. They take the first batch of skins out
to gallop them at 5.30 in the morning and they work the second lot at
8 o’clock. That means getting up early all right and going to bed
early too. If a jock’s riding for somebody too he can’t go boozing
around because the trainer always has an eye on him if he’s a kid and
if he aint a kid he’s always got an eye on himself. So mostly if a
jock aint working he sits around the Café de Paris with the gang and
they can all sit around about two or three hours in front of some
drink like a vermouth and seltz and they talk and tell stories and
shoot pool and it’s sort of like a club or the Galleria in Milan.
Only it aint really like the Galleria because there everybody is
going by all the time and there’s everybody around at the tables.

Well my old man got his license all right. They sent it through to
him without a word and he rode a couple of times. Amiens, up country
and that sort of thing, but he didn’t seem to get any engagement.
Everybody liked him and whenever I’d come in to the Café in the
forenoon I’d find somebody drinking with him because my old man
wasn’t tight like most of these jockey’s that have got the first
dollar they made riding at the World’s Fair in St. Louis in Nineteen
ought four. That’s what my old man would say when he’d kid George
Burns. But it seemed like everybody steered clear of giving my old
man any mounts.

We went out to wherever they were running every day with the car from
Maisons and that was the most fun of all. I was glad when the horses
came back from Deauville and the summer. Even though it meant no more
bumming in the woods, cause then we’d ride to Enghien or Tremblay or
St. Cloud and watch them from the trainers’ and jockeys’ stand. I
sure learned about racing from going out with that gang and the fun
of it was going every day.

I remember once out at St. Cloud. It was a big two hundred thousand
franc race with seven entries and Kzar a big favourite. I went around
to the paddock to see the horses with my old man and you never saw
such horses. This Kzar is a great big yellow horse that looks like
just nothing but run. I never saw such a horse. He was being led
around the paddock with his head down and when he went by me I felt
all hollow inside he was so beautiful. There never was such a
wonderful, lean, running built horse. And he went around the paddock
putting his feet just so and quiet and careful and moving easy like
he knew just what he had to do and not jerking and standing up on his
legs and getting wild eyed like you see these selling platers with a
shot of dope in them. The crowd was so thick I couldn’t see him again
except just his legs going by and some yellow and my old man started
out through the crowd and I followed him over to the jock’s dressing
room back in the trees and there was a big crowd around there too but
the man at the door in a derby nodded to my old man and we got in and
everybody was sitting around and getting dressed and pulling shirts
over their heads and pulling boots on and it all smelled hot and
sweaty and linimenty and outside was the crowd looking in.

The old man went over and sat down beside George Gardner that was
getting into his pants and said, “What’s the dope George?” just in an
ordinary tone of voice cause there aint any use him feeling around
because George either can tell him or he can’t tell him.

“He won’t win” George says very low, leaning over and buttoning the
bottoms of his pants.

“Who will” my old man says leaning over close so nobody can hear.

“Kircubbin” George says, “And if he does, save me a couple of
tickets”.

My old man says something in a regular voice to George and George
says, “Don’t ever bet on anything I tell you” kidding like and we
beat it out and through all the crowd that was looking in over to the
100 franc mutuel machine. But I knew something big was up because
George is Kzar’s jockey. On the way he gets one of the yellow odds
sheets with the starting prices on and Kzar is only paying 5 for 10,
Cefisidote is next at 3 to I and fifth down the list this Kircubbin
at 8 to 1. My old man bets five thousand on Kircubbin to win and puts
on a thousand to place and we went around back of the grandstand to
go up the stairs and get a place to watch the race.

We were jammed in tight and first a man in a long coat with a grey
tall hat and a whip folded up in his hand came out and then one after
another the horses, with the jocks up and a stable boy holding the
bridle on each side and walking along, followed the old guy. That big
yellow horse Kzar came first. He didn’t look so big when you first
looked at him until you saw the length of his legs and the whole way
he’s built and the way he moves. Gosh I never saw such a horse.
George Gardner was riding him and they moved along slow, back of the
old guy in the gray tall hat that walked along like he was the ring
master in a circus. Back of Kzar, moving along smooth and yellow in
the sun, was a good looking black with a nice head with Tommy
Archibald riding him and after the black was a string of five more
horses all moving along slow in a procession past the grandstand and
the pesage. My old man said the black was Kircubbin and I took a good
look at him and he was a nice looking horse all right but nothing
like Kzar.

Everybody cheered Kzar when he went by and he sure was one swell
looking horse. The procession of them went around on the other side
past the pelouse and then back up to the near end of the course and
the circus master had the stable boys turn them loose one after
another so they could gallop by the stands on their way up to the
post and let everybody have a good look at them. They weren’t at the
post hardly any time at all when the gong started and you could see
them way off across the infield all in a bunch starting on the first
swing like a lot of little toy horses. I was watching them through
the glasses and Kzar was running well back with one of the bays
making the pace. They swept down and around and came pounding past
and Kzar was way back when they passed us and this Kircubbin horse in
front and going smooth. Gee it’s awful when they go by you and then
you have to watch them go farther away and get smaller and smaller
and then all bunched up on the turns and then come around towards
into the stretch and you feel like swearing and goddaming worse and
worse. Finally they made the last turn and came into the straightaway
with this Kircubbin horse way out in front. Everybody was looking
funny and saying “Kzar” in sort of a sick way and they pounding
nearer down the stretch, and then something came out of the pack
right into my glasses like a horse-headed yellow streak and everybody
began to yell “Kzar” as though they were crazy. Kzar came on faster
than I’d ever seen anything in my life and pulled up on Kircubbin
that was going fast as any black horse could go with the jock
flogging hell out of him with the gad and they were right dead neck
and neck for a second but Kzar seemed going about twice as fast with
those great jumps and that head out—but it was while they were neck
and neck that they passed the winning post and when the numbers went
up in the slots the first one was 2 and that meant Kircubbin had won.

I felt all trembly and funny inside, and then we were all jammed in
with the people going down stairs to stand in front of the board
where they’d post what Kircubbin paid. Honest watching the race I’d
forgot how much my old man had bet on Kircubbin. I’d wanted Kzar to
win so damned bad. But now it was all over it was swell to know we
had the winner.

“Wasn’t it a swell race Dad?” I said to him.

He looked at me sort of funny with his derby on the back of his head,
“George Gardner’s a swell jockey all right”, he said, “It sure took a
great jock to keep that Kzar horse from winning”.

Of course I knew it was funny all the time. But my old man saying
that right out like that sure took the kick all out of it for me and
I didn’t get the real kick back again ever, even when they posted the
numbers up on the board and the bell rang to pay off and we saw that
Kircubbin paid 67.50 for 10. All around people were saying “Poor
Kzar. Poor Kzar!” And I thought, I wish I were a jockey and could
have rode him instead of that son of a bitch. And that was funny,
thinking of George Gardner as a son of a bitch because I’d always
liked him and besides he’d given us the winner, but I guess that’s
what he is all right.

My old man had a big lot of money after that race and he took to
coming into Paris oftener. If they raced at Tremblay he’d have them
drop him in town on their way back to Maisons and he and I’d sit out
in front of the Café de la Paix and watch the people go by. It’s
funny sitting there. There’s streams of people going by and all sorts
of guys come up and want to sell you things and I loved to sit there
with my old man. That was when we’d have the most fun. Guys would
come by selling funny rabbits that jumped if you squeezed a bulb and
they’d come up to us and my old man would kid with them. He could
talk French just like English and all those kind of guys knew him
cause you can always tell a jockey—and then we always sat at the same
table and they got used to seeing us there. There were guys selling
matrimonial papers and girls selling rubber eggs that when you
squeezed them a rooster came out of them and one old wormy looking
guy that went by with post cards of Paris showing them to everybody,
and of course nobody ever bought any and then he would come back and
show the under side of the pack and they would all be smutty post
cards and lots of people would dig down and buy them.

Gee I remember the funny people that used to go by. Girls around
supper time looking for somebody to take them out to eat and they’d
speak to my old man and he’d make some joke at them in French and
they’d pat me on the head and go on. Once there was an American woman
sitting with her kid daughter at the next table to us and they were
both eating ices and I kept looking at the girl and she was awfully
good looking and I smiled at her and she smiled at me but that was
all that ever came of it because I looked for her mother and her
every day and I made up ways that I was going to speak to her and I
wondered if I got to know her if her mother would let me take her out
to Auteuil or Tremblay but I never saw either of them again. Anyway I
guess it wouldn’t have been any good anyway because looking back on
it I remember the way I thought out would be best to speak to her was
to say, “Pardon me, but perhaps I can give you a winner at Enghien
today?” and after all maybe she would have thought I was a tout
instead of really trying to give her a winner.

We’d sit at the Café de la Paix, my old man and me, and we had a big
drag with the waiter because my old man drank whisky and it cost five
francs and that meant a good tip when the saucers were counted up. My
old man was drinking more than I’d ever seen him, but he wasn’t
riding at all now and besides he said that whiskey kept his weight
down. But I noticed he was putting it on all right just the same.
He’d busted away from his old gang out at Maisons and seemed to like
just sitting around on the boulevard with me. But he was dropping
money every day at the track. He’d feel sort of doleful after the
last race, if he’d lost on the day, until we’d get to our table and
he’d have his first whiskey and then he’d be fine.

He’d be reading the Paris-Sport and he’d look over at me and say,
“Where’s your girl Joe?” to kid me on account I had told him about
the girl that day at the next table. And I’d get red but I liked
being kidded about her. It gave me a good feeling. “Keep your eye
peeled for her Joe.” he’d say, “She’ll be back.”

He’d ask me questions about things and some of the things I’d say
he’d laugh. And then he’d get started talking about things. About
riding down in Egypt, or at St. Moritz on the ice before my mother
died, and about during the war when they had regular races down in
the south of France without any purses, or betting or crowd or
anything just to keep the breed up. Regular races with the jocks
riding hell out of the horses. Gee I could listen to my old man talk
by the hour, especially when he’d had a couple or so of drinks. He’d
tell me about when he was a boy in Kentucky and going coon hunting
and the old days in the states before everything went on the bum
there. And he’d say, “Joe, when we’ve got a decent stake, you’re
going back there to the States and go to school.”

“What’ve I got to go back there to go to school for when everything’s
on the bum there?” I’d ask him.

“That’s different.” he’d say and get the waiter over and pay the pile
of saucers and we’d get a taxi to the Gare St. Lazare and get on the
train out to Maisons.

One day at Auteuil after a selling steeplechase my old man bought in
the winner for 30.000 francs. He had to bid a little to get him but
the stable let the horse go finally and my old man had his permit and
his colors in a week. Gee I felt proud when my old man was an owner.
He fixed it up for stable space with Charles Drake and cut out coming
in to Paris and started his running and sweating out again and him
and I were the whole stable gang. Our horse’s name was Gillford, he
was Irish bred and a nice sweet jumper. My old man figured that
training him and riding him himself he was a good investment. I was
proud of everything and I thought Gillford was as good a horse as
Kzar. He was a good solid jumper a bay, with plenty of speed on the
flat if you asked him for it and he was a nice looking horse too.

Gee I was fond of him. The first time he started with my old man up
he finished third in a 2.500 meter hurdle race and when my old man
got off him, all sweating and happy in the place stall and went in to
weigh I felt as proud of him as though it was the first race he’d
ever placed in. You see when a guy aint been riding for a long time
you can’t make yourself really believe that he has ever rode. The
whole thing was different now cause down in Milan even big races
never seemed to make any difference to my old man, if he won he
wasn’t ever excited or anything, and now it was so I couldn’t hardly
sleep the night before a race and I knew my old man was excited too
even if he didn’t show it. Riding for yourself makes an awful
difference.

Second time Gillford and my old man started was a rainy Sunday at
Auteuil in the Prix du Marat, a 4.500 meter steeplechase. As soon as
he’d gone out I beat it up in the stand with the new glasses my old
man had bought for me to watch them. They started way over at the far
end of the course and there was some trouble at the barrier.
Something with goggle blinders on was making a great fuss and rearing
around and busted the barrier once but I could see my old man in our
black jacket with a white cross and a black cap sitting up on
Gillford and patting him with his hand. Then they were off in a jump
and out of sight behind the trees and the gong going for dear life
and the pari mutuel wickets rattling down. Gosh I was so excited I
was afraid to look at them but I fixed the glasses on the place where
they would come out back of the trees and then out they came with the
old black jacket going third and they all sailing over the jump like
birds. Then they went out of sight again and then they came pounding
out and down the hill and all going nice and sweet and easy and
taking the fence smooth in a bunch and moving away from us all solid.
Looked as though you could walk across on their backs they were all
so bunched and going so smooth, Then they bellied over the big double
Bullfinch and something came down. I couldn’t see who it was but in a
minute the horse was up an galloping free and the field, all bunched
still, sweeping around the long left turn into the straightaway. They
jumped the stone wall and came jammed down the stretch toward the big
water jump right in front of the stands. I saw them coming and
hollered at my old man as he went by and he was leading by about a
length and riding way out over and light as a monkey and they were
racing for the water jump. They took off over the big hedge of the
water jump in a pack and then there was a crash and two horses pulled
sideways out off it and kept on going and three others were piled up.
I couldn’t see my old man anywhere. One horse knee-ed himself up and
the jock had hold of the bridle and mounted and went slamming on
after the place money. The other horse was up and away by himself,
jerking his head and galloping with the bridle rein hanging and the
jock staggered over to one side of the track against the fence. Then
Gillford rolled over to one side off my old man and got up and
started to run on three legs with his off hoof dangling and there was
my old man lying there on the grass flat out with his face up and
blood all over the side of his head. I ran down the stand and bumped
into a jam of people and got to the rail and a cop grabbed me and
held me and two big stretcher bearers were going out after my old man
and around on the other side of the course I saw three horses, strung
way out, coming out of the trees and taking the jump.

My old man was dead when they brought him in and while a doctor was
listening to his heart with a thing plugged in his ears I heard a
shot up the track that meant they’d killed Gillford. I lay down
beside my old man when they carried the stretcher into the hospital
room and hung onto the stretcher and cried and cried and he looked so
white and gone and so awfully dead and I couldn’t help feeling that
if my old man was dead maybe they didn’t need to have shot Gillford.
His hoof might have got well. I don’t know. I loved my old man so
much.

Then a couple of guys came in and one of them patted me on the back
and then went over and looked at my old man and then pulled a sheet
off the cot and and spread it over him; and the other was telephoning
in French for them to send the ambulance to take him out to Maisons.
And I couldn’t stop crying, crying and choking, sort of, and George
Gardner came in and sat down beside me on the floor and put his arm
around me and says, “Come on Joe old boy. Get up and we’ll go out and
wait for the ambulance.”

George and I went out to the gate and I was trying to stop bawling
and George wiped off my face with his handkerchief and we were
standing back a little ways while the crowd was going out of the gate
and a couple of guys stopped near us while we were waiting for the
crowd to get through the gate and one of them was counting a bunch of
mutuel tickets and he said, “Well Butler got his all right.”

The other guy said, “I don’t give a good goddam if he did, the crook.
He had it coming to him on the stuff he’s pulled.”

“I’ll say he had,” said the other guy and tore the bunch of tickets
in two.

And George Gardner looked at me to see if I’d heard and I had all
right and he said, “Don’t you listen to what those bums said Joe.
Your old man was one swell guy.”

But I don’t know. Seems like when they get started they dont leave a
guy nothing.




TEN POEMS




  MITRAIGLIATRICE


  The mills of the gods grind slowly;
  But this mill
  Chatters in mechanical staccato.
  Ugly short infantry of the mind,
  Advancing over difficult terrain,
  Make this Corona
  Their mitrailleuse.




  OKLAHOMA


  All of the Indians are dead
  (a good Indian is a dead Indian)
  Or riding in motor cars—
  (the oil lands, you know, they’re all rich)
  Smoke smarts my eyes,
  Cottonwood twigs and buffalo dung
  Smoke grey in the teepee—
  (or is it myopic trachoma)

  The prairies are long,
  The moon rises,
  Ponies
  Drag at their pickets.
  The grass has gone brown in the summer—
  (or is it the hay crop failing)

  Pull an arrow out:
  If you break it
  The wound closes.
  Salt is good too
  And wood ashes.
  Pounding it throbs in the night—
  (or is it the gonorrhea)




OILY WEATHER


  The sea desires deep hulls—
  It swells and rolls.
  The screw churns a throb—
  Driving, throbbing, progressing.
  The sea rolls with love
  Surging, caressing,
  Undulating its great loving belly.
  The sea is big and old—
  Throbbing ships scorn it.



ROOSEVELT


  Workingmen believed
  He busted trusts,
  And put his picture in their windows.
  “What he’d have done in France!”
  They said.
  Perhaps he would—
  He could have died
  Perhaps,
  Though generals rarely die except in bed,
  As he did finally.
  And all the legends that he started in his life
  Live on and prosper,
  Unhampered now by his existence.



CAPTIVES


  Some came in chains
  Unrepentent but tired.
  Too tired but to stumble.
  Thinking and hating were finished
  Thinking and fighting were finished
  Retreating and hoping were finished.
  Cures thus a long campaign,
  Making death easy.



CHAMPS D’HONNEUR


  Soldiers never do die well;
         Crosses mark the places—
  Wooden crosses where they fell,
         Stuck above their faces.
  Soldiers pitch and cough and twitch—
         All the world roars red and black;
  Soldiers smother in a ditch,
         Choking through the whole attack.



RIPARTO D’ASSALTO


  Drummed their boots on the camion floor,
  Hob-nailed boots on the camion floor.
  Sergeants stiff,
  Corporals sore.
  Lieutenant thought of a Mestre whore—
  Warm and soft and sleepy whore,
  Cozy, warm and lovely whore;
  Damned cold, bitter, rotten ride,
  Winding road up the Grappa side.
  Arditi on benches stiff and cold,
  Pride of their country stiff and cold,
  Bristly faces, dirty hides—
  Infantry marches, Arditi rides.
  Grey, cold, bitter, sullen ride—
  To splintered pines on the Grappa side
  At Asalone, where the truck-load died.




MONTPARNASSE


  There are never any suicides in the quarter among people one knows
  No successful suicides.
  A Chinese boy kills himself and is dead.
  (they continue to place his mail in the letter rack at the Dome)
  A Norwegian boy kills himself and is dead.
  (no one knows where the other Norwegian boy has gone)
  They find a model dead
  alone in bed and very dead.
  (it made almost unbearable trouble for the concierge)
  Sweet oil, the white of eggs, mustard and water, soap suds
  and stomach pumps rescue the people one knows.
  Every afternoon the people one knows can be found at the café.




ALONG WITH YOUTH


  A porcupine skin,
  Stiff with bad tanning,
  It must have ended somewhere.
  Stuffed horned owl
  Pompous
  Yellow eyed;
  Chuck-wills-widow on a biassed twig
  Sooted with dust.
  Piles of old magazines,
  Drawers of boy’s letters
  And the line of love
  They must have ended somewhere.
  Yesterday’s Tribune is gone
  Along with youth
  And the canoe that went to pieces on the beach
  The year of the big storm
  When the hotel burned down
  At Seney, Michigan.




CHAPTER HEADING


  For we have thought the longer thoughts
          And gone the shorter way.
  And we have danced to devils’ tunes,
          Shivering home to pray;
  To serve one master in the night,
          Another in the day.















